[Jump to content](#bodyContent)

Paraguay
========

[Coordinates](/wiki/Geographic_coordinate_system "Geographic coordinate system"): [23°S 58°W﻿ / ﻿23°S 58°W﻿ / -23; -58](https://geohack.toolforge.org/geohack.php?pagename=Paraguay&params=23_S_58_W_)

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Country in South America

This article is about the country. For other uses, see [Paraguay (disambiguation)](/wiki/Paraguay_(disambiguation) "Paraguay (disambiguation)").

**Paraguay**,[[c]](#cite_note-11) officially the **Republic of Paraguay**,[[d]](#cite_note-12) is a [landlocked country](/wiki/Landlocked_country "Landlocked country") in [South America](/wiki/South_America "South America"). It is bordered by [Argentina](/wiki/Argentina "Argentina") to the [south and southwest](/wiki/Argentina%E2%80%93Paraguay_border "Argentina–Paraguay border"), [Brazil](/wiki/Brazil "Brazil") to the [east and northeast](/wiki/Brazil%E2%80%93Paraguay_border "Brazil–Paraguay border"), and [Bolivia](/wiki/Bolivia "Bolivia") to the northwest. It has a population of around 6.1 million, nearly 2.3 million of whom live in the [capital](/wiki/Capital_city "Capital city") and largest city of [Asunción](/wiki/Asunci%C3%B3n "Asunción"), and its surrounding metro area.

Spanish [conquistadores](/wiki/Conquistador "Conquistador") arrived in 1524, and in 1537 established the city of [Asunción](/wiki/Asunci%C3%B3n "Asunción"), the first capital of the [Governorate of the Río de la Plata](/wiki/Governorate_of_the_R%C3%ADo_de_la_Plata "Governorate of the Río de la Plata").[[9]](#cite_note-13) During the 17th century, Paraguay was the center of [Jesuit missions](/wiki/Reductions "Reductions"), where the native [Guaraní people](/wiki/Guaran%C3%AD_people "Guaraní people") were converted to Christianity and introduced to European culture.[[10]](#cite_note-14) After the [expulsion of the Jesuits](/wiki/Suppression_of_the_Society_of_Jesus "Suppression of the Society of Jesus") from Spanish territories in 1767, Paraguay increasingly became a peripheral colony. Following [independence from Spain](/wiki/Independence_of_Paraguay "Independence of Paraguay") in the early 19th century, Paraguay was ruled by a series of authoritarian governments. This period ended with the disastrous [Paraguayan War](/wiki/Paraguayan_War "Paraguayan War") (1864–1870), during which the country lost half its prewar population and around 25–33% of its territory. In the 20th century, Paraguay faced another major international conflict—the [Chaco War](/wiki/Chaco_War "Chaco War") (1932–1935) against Bolivia—in which Paraguay prevailed. The country came under a succession of military dictators, culminating in the 35-year regime of [Alfredo Stroessner](/wiki/Alfredo_Stroessner "Alfredo Stroessner"), which lasted until his overthrow in 1989 by an internal military coup. This marked the beginning of Paraguay's current democratic era.

Paraguay is a [developing country](/wiki/Developing_country "Developing country"), ranking 105th in the [Human Development Index](/wiki/Human_Development_Index "Human Development Index").[[11]](#cite_note-15) It is a founding member of [Mercosur](/wiki/Mercosur "Mercosur"), the [United Nations](/wiki/United_Nations "United Nations"), the [Organization of American States](/wiki/Organization_of_American_States "Organization of American States"), the [Non-Aligned Movement](/wiki/Non-Aligned_Movement "Non-Aligned Movement") and the [Lima Group](/wiki/Lima_Group "Lima Group"). Additionally, the city of [Luque](/wiki/Luque "Luque"), in metropolitan Asunción, is the seat of the [South American Football Confederation](/wiki/CONMEBOL "CONMEBOL").

While it is the only landlocked country in South America besides [Bolivia](/wiki/Bolivia "Bolivia"), Paraguayan ports are able to access the Atlantic Ocean via the [Paraná–Paraguay Waterway](/wiki/Paran%C3%A1%E2%80%93Paraguay_Waterway "Paraná–Paraguay Waterway").[[12]](#cite_note-16) The majority of Paraguay's 6 million people are *[mestizo](/wiki/Mestizo "Mestizo")*, and Guarani culture remains widely influential; more than 90% of the population speak various dialects of the [Guarani language](/wiki/Guarani_language "Guarani language") alongside Spanish. Paraguay's GDP per capita PPP is the seventh-highest in South America. In a 2014 Positive Experience Index based on global polling data, Paraguay ranked as the "world's happiest place".[[13]](#cite_note-17)

Etymology
---------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=1 "Edit section: Etymology")]

The origin of the name Paraguay is uncertain. One version postulates the name takes from [Guaraní](/wiki/Guaran%C3%AD_language "Guaraní language") *paraguá* "feather crown" and *y* "water" thus *paraguaí* "feather crown of waters".[[14]](#cite_note-18) Other versions affirm that the name derives from the [Payaguá people](/wiki/Payagu%C3%A1 "Payaguá"),[[15]](#cite_note-auto-19) for the [Paraguay River](/wiki/Paraguay_River "Paraguay River") was called the *Payaguá-y*, or "river of the Payaguás" by the [Guaraní](/wiki/Guaran%C3%AD_people "Guaraní people") and hence would have come the name for the country; or that, also from the Guaraní, *para* would mean sea, *gua*, originates, and *y*, river, thus Paraguay would mean "river which gives birth to the sea".[[16]](#cite_note-20)

History
-------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=2 "Edit section: History")]

Main article: [History of Paraguay](/wiki/History_of_Paraguay "History of Paraguay")

### Precolonial

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=3 "Edit section: Precolonial")]

The indigenous [Guaraní](/wiki/Guaran%C3%AD_people "Guaraní people") had been living in eastern Paraguay for at least a millennium before the arrival of the [Spanish](/wiki/Spanish_Empire "Spanish Empire"). Western Paraguay, the [Gran Chaco](/wiki/Gran_Chaco "Gran Chaco"), was inhabited by nomads of whom the [Guaycuru](/wiki/Guaycuru_peoples "Guaycuru peoples") peoples were the most prominent. The Paraguay River was roughly the dividing line between the agricultural Guarani people to the east and the nomadic and seminomadic people to the west in the Gran Chaco. The Guarcuru nomads were known for their warrior traditions and were not fully pacified until the late 19th century. These indigenous tribes belonged to five distinct language families, which were the bases of their major divisions. Differing language speaking groups were generally competitive over resources and territories. They were further divided into tribes by speaking languages in branches of these families. Today 17 separate [ethnolinguistic](/wiki/Ethnolinguistics "Ethnolinguistics") groups remain.

### Colonial era

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=4 "Edit section: Colonial era")]

The first Europeans in the area were Spanish explorers in 1516.[[17]](#cite_note-eec-21) The Spanish explorer [Juan de Salazar de Espinosa](/wiki/Juan_de_Salazar_de_Espinosa "Juan de Salazar de Espinosa") founded the settlement of [Asunción](/wiki/Asunci%C3%B3n "Asunción") on 15 August 1537. The city eventually became the center of a [Spanish colonial province of Paraguay](/wiki/Spanish_colonization_of_the_Americas "Spanish colonization of the Americas").

An attempt to create an autonomous Christian Indian nation[[18]](#cite_note-cite_wdl|#2581-22) was undertaken by [Jesuit](/wiki/Society_of_Jesus "Society of Jesus") missions and settlements in this part of South America in the eighteenth century. They developed [Jesuit reductions](/wiki/Jesuit_reduction "Jesuit reduction") to bring Guarani populations together at Spanish missions and protect them from virtual slavery by Spanish settlers and Portuguese slave raiders, the [bandeirantes](/wiki/Bandeirantes "Bandeirantes"), in addition to seeking their conversion to Christianity. Catholicism in Paraguay was influenced by the indigenous peoples: The [syncretic](/wiki/Syncretic "Syncretic") religion has absorbed native elements. The *reducciones* flourished in eastern Paraguay for about 150 years, until the expulsion of the Jesuits by the Spanish Crown in 1767. The ruins of two 18th century [Jesuit Missions of La Santísima Trinidad de Paraná and Jesús de Tavarangue](/wiki/Jesuit_Missions_of_La_Sant%C3%ADsima_Trinidad_de_Paran%C3%A1_and_Jes%C3%BAs_de_Tavarangue "Jesuit Missions of La Santísima Trinidad de Paraná and Jesús de Tavarangue") have been designated as [World Heritage Sites](/wiki/World_Heritage_Sites "World Heritage Sites") by [UNESCO](/wiki/UNESCO "UNESCO").[[18]](#cite_note-cite_wdl|#2581-22)

In western Paraguay, Spanish settlement and Christianity were strongly resisted by the nomadic [Guaycuru](/wiki/Guaycuru_peoples "Guaycuru peoples") and other nomads from the 16th century onward. Most of these peoples were absorbed into the [mestizo](/wiki/Mestizo "Mestizo") population in the 18th and 19th centuries.

### Independence and rule of Francia

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=5 "Edit section: Independence and rule of Francia")]

Main article: [Independence of Paraguay](/wiki/Independence_of_Paraguay "Independence of Paraguay")

Paraguay overthrew the local Spanish administration on 14 May 1811. Paraguay's first dictator was [José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia](/wiki/Jos%C3%A9_Gaspar_Rodr%C3%ADguez_de_Francia "José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia"), who ruled Paraguay from 1814 until his death in 1840 with very little outside contact or influence. He intended to create a [utopian](/wiki/Utopia "Utopia") society based on the [Genevan](/wiki/Geneva "Geneva") theorist [Jean-Jacques Rousseau](/wiki/Jean-Jacques_Rousseau "Jean-Jacques Rousseau")'s [*Social Contract*](/wiki/The_Social_Contract "The Social Contract").[[19]](#cite_note-23) Rodríguez de Francia was nicknamed *El Supremo*.

Rodríguez de Francia established new laws that greatly reduced the powers of the Catholic church (Catholicism was then an established state religion) and the cabinet, forbade colonial citizens from marrying one another and allowed them to marry only blacks, [mulattoes](/wiki/Mulattoes "Mulattoes") or natives, in order to break the power of colonial-era elites and to create a [mixed-race](/wiki/Mixed-race "Mixed-race") or mestizo society.[[20]](#cite_note-24) He cut off relations between Paraguay and the rest of South America. Because of Francia's restrictions of freedom, [Fulgencio Yegros](/wiki/Fulgencio_Yegros "Fulgencio Yegros") and several other Independence-era leaders in 1820 planned a *coup d'état* against Francia, who discovered the plot and had its leaders either executed or imprisoned for life.[[21]](#cite_note-25)

### Rule of the López family

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=6 "Edit section: Rule of the López family")]

After Francia's death in 1840, Paraguay was ruled by various military officers under a new *[junta](/wiki/Military_junta "Military junta")*, until [Carlos Antonio López](/wiki/Carlos_Antonio_L%C3%B3pez "Carlos Antonio López") (allegedly Rodríguez de Francia's nephew) came to power in 1841. López modernized Paraguay and opened it to foreign commerce. He signed a [nonaggression pact](/wiki/Nonaggression_pact "Nonaggression pact") with Argentina and officially declared independence of Paraguay in 1842. After López's death in 1862, power was transferred to his eldest son, [Francisco Solano López](/wiki/Francisco_Solano_L%C3%B3pez "Francisco Solano López").

The regime of the López family was characterized by pervasive and rigid centralism in production and distribution. There was no distinction between the public and the private spheres, and the López family ruled the country as it would a large estate.[[22]](#cite_note-26)

The government exerted control on all exports. The export of [yerba mate](/wiki/Yerba_mate "Yerba mate") and valuable wood products maintained the balance of trade between Paraguay and the outside world.[[23]](#cite_note-27) The Paraguayan government was extremely protectionist, never accepted loans from abroad and levied high [tariffs](/wiki/Tariff "Tariff") against imported foreign products. This [protectionism](/wiki/Protectionism "Protectionism") made the society self-sufficient, and it also avoided the debt suffered by Argentina and Brazil. Slavery existed in Paraguay, although not in great numbers, until 1844, when it was legally abolished in the new constitution.[[24]](#cite_note-rbcg1933-28): 39–40

[Francisco Solano López](/wiki/Francisco_Solano_L%C3%B3pez "Francisco Solano López"), the son of Carlos Antonio López, replaced his father as the President-Dictator in 1862, and generally continued the political policies of his father. Both wanted to give an international image of Paraguay as "democratic and republican", but in fact, the ruling family had almost total control of all public life in the country, including church and colleges.[[24]](#cite_note-rbcg1933-28): 41–42

Militarily, Carlos Antonio López modernized and expanded industry and the [Paraguayan Army](/wiki/Paraguayan_Army "Paraguayan Army") and greatly strengthened the strategic defenses of Paraguay by developing the [Fortress of Humaitá](/wiki/Fortress_of_Humait%C3%A1 "Fortress of Humaitá").[[25]](#cite_note-29) The government hired more than 200 foreign technicians, who installed [telegraph lines](/wiki/Telegraph_line "Telegraph line") and railroads to aid the expanding steel, textile, paper and ink, naval construction, weapons and gunpowder industries. The [Ybycuí](/wiki/Ybycu%C3%AD "Ybycuí") foundry, completed in 1850, manufactured cannons, mortars and bullets of all calibers. River warships were built in the shipyards of Asunción. Fortifications were built, especially along the [Apa River](/wiki/Apa_River "Apa River") and in [Gran Chaco](/wiki/Gran_Chaco "Gran Chaco").[[26]](#cite_note-Hooker-30): 22 Following the death of Carlos Antonio López, these projects continued under his son Francisco Solano.

In terms of socio-economic development, the country was dubbed "the most advanced Republic in South America", notably by the British judge and politician [Sir Robert Phillimore](/wiki/Robert_Phillimore "Robert Phillimore").[[27]](#cite_note-31)

According to George Thompson, Lieutenant Colonel of Engineers in the Paraguayan Army prior to and during the war, López's government was comparatively a good one for Paraguay:

> Probably in no other country in the world has life and property been so secure as all over Paraguay during his (Antonio Lopez's) reign. Crime was almost unknown, and when committed, immediately detected and punished. The mass of the people was, perhaps, the happiest in existence. They had hardly to do any work to gain a livelihood. Each family had its house or hut in its own ground. They planted, in a few days, enough tobacco, maize and mandioca for their own consumption [...]. Having at every hut a grove of oranges [...] and also a few cows, they were almost throughout the year under little necessity [...]. The higher classes, of course, lived more in the European way...
>
> — George Thompson, C.E.[[28]](#cite_note-32)

### Paraguayan War (1864–1870)

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=7 "Edit section: Paraguayan War (1864–1870)")]

Main articles: [Paraguayan War](/wiki/Paraguayan_War "Paraguayan War") and [Paraguayan War casualties](/wiki/Paraguayan_War_casualties "Paraguayan War casualties")

On 12 October 1864, despite Paraguayan ultimatums, [Brazil](/wiki/Empire_of_Brazil "Empire of Brazil") (allied with the Argentine Government under General [Bartolomé Mitre](/wiki/Bartolom%C3%A9_Mitre "Bartolomé Mitre") and the rebellious [Uruguayan colorados](/wiki/Colorado_Party_(Uruguay) "Colorado Party (Uruguay)") led by Gen. [Venancio Flores](/wiki/Venancio_Flores "Venancio Flores")) invaded the Republic of Uruguay in order to overthrow the government of that time (which was under the rule of the [Blanco Party](/wiki/National_Party_(Uruguay) "National Party (Uruguay)"), an ally of López),[[e]](#cite_note-34) thus starting the [Paraguayan War](/wiki/Paraguayan_War "Paraguayan War").[[f]](#cite_note-36)

The Paraguayans, led by the [Marshal of the Republic](/wiki/Grand_marshal "Grand marshal") [Francisco Solano López](/wiki/Francisco_Solano_L%C3%B3pez "Francisco Solano López"), retaliated by [attacking Mato Grosso](/wiki/Mato_Grosso_Campaign "Mato Grosso Campaign") on 15 December 1864 and later declared war against Argentina on 23 March 1865. The Blanco Government was toppled and replaced by a Colorado government under General Venancio Flores on 22 February 1865. Afterward, the [Argentine Republic](/wiki/Argentine_Republic "Argentine Republic"), the [Empire of Brazil](/wiki/Empire_of_Brazil "Empire of Brazil") and the Republic of Uruguay signed the [Secret Treaty of the Triple Alliance](/wiki/Treaty_of_the_Triple_Alliance "Treaty of the Triple Alliance") against the Paraguayan Government on 1 May 1865.[[31]](#cite_note-37)

On 24 May 1866, the [Battle of Tuyutí](/wiki/Battle_of_Tuyut%C3%AD "Battle of Tuyutí") led to the loss of 6,000 men when a Paraguayan attack was repelled by the Allies. It was marked as the bloodiest battle in South America during the war.

The Paraguayans put up a ferocious resistance but ultimately lost in 1870 in the [Battle of Cerro Corá](/wiki/Battle_of_Cerro_Cor%C3%A1 "Battle of Cerro Corá"), where Marshal Solano López refused to surrender and died in action.[[32]](#cite_note-38) The real causes of this war, which remains the bloodiest international conflict in the history of [The Americas](/wiki/The_Americas "The Americas"), are still highly debatable.[[g]](#cite_note-39)

Paraguay lost 25–33% of its territory to Argentina and Brazil, paid an enormous war debt, and sold large amounts of national properties to stabilize its internal budget. The worst consequence of the war was the catastrophic loss of population. At least 50% of Paraguayans died during the conflict, numbers to which it took many decades for the country to return. Of the disaster suffered by the Paraguayans at the outcome of the war, [William D. Rubinstein](/wiki/William_D._Rubinstein "William D. Rubinstein") wrote:

"The normal estimate is that of a Paraguayan population of somewhere between 450,000 and 900,000, only 220,000 survived the war, of whom only 28,000 were adult males."[[33]](#cite_note-40)

During the pillaging of Asunción in 1869, the [Imperial Brazilian Army](/wiki/Imperial_Brazilian_Army "Imperial Brazilian Army") packed up and transported the Paraguayan National Archives to [Rio de Janeiro](/wiki/Rio_de_Janeiro "Rio de Janeiro").[[34]](#cite_note-41)[[h]](#cite_note-42) Brazil's records from the war have remained classified. This has made Paraguayan history in the colonial and early national periods difficult to research and study.[[35]](#cite_note-Weinstein-2007-04-43)

### 20th century

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=8 "Edit section: 20th century")]

In 1904 the Liberal revolution against the rule of Colorados broke out. The Liberal rule started a period of great political instability. Between 1904 and 1954 Paraguay had thirty-one [presidents](/wiki/President_of_Paraguay "President of Paraguay"), most of whom were removed from office by force.[[36]](#cite_note-44) Conflicts between the factions of the ruling Liberal party led to the [Paraguayan Civil War of 1922](/wiki/Paraguayan_Civil_War_(1922) "Paraguayan Civil War (1922)").

The unresolved border conflict with Bolivia over the Chaco region finally erupted in the early 1930s in the [Chaco War](/wiki/Chaco_War "Chaco War"). After both sides suffered great losses, Paraguay defeated Bolivia and established its sovereignty over most of the disputed Chaco region. After the war, military officers used popular dissatisfaction with the Liberal politicians to seize the power for themselves. On 17 February 1936, the [February Revolution](/wiki/February_Revolution_(Paraguay) "February Revolution (Paraguay)") brought colonel [Rafael Franco](/wiki/Rafael_Franco "Rafael Franco") to power. Between 1940 and 1948, the country was ruled by general [Higinio Morínigo](/wiki/Higinio_Mor%C3%ADnigo "Higinio Morínigo"). Dissatisfaction with his rule resulted in the [Paraguayan civil war of 1947](/wiki/Paraguayan_Civil_War_(1947) "Paraguayan Civil War (1947)").[[37]](#cite_note-45) In its aftermath [Alfredo Stroessner](/wiki/Alfredo_Stroessner "Alfredo Stroessner") began involvement in a string of plots, which resulted in his military [coup d'état of 4 May 1954](/wiki/1954_Paraguayan_coup_d%27%C3%A9tat "1954 Paraguayan coup d'état"). In the aftermath of [World War II](/wiki/World_War_II "World War II"), Paraguay became a hideout for [Nazi fugitives](/wiki/Ratlines_(World_War_II_aftermath) "Ratlines (World War II aftermath)") accused of war crimes.

### Stroessner era, 1954–1989

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=9 "Edit section: Stroessner era, 1954–1989")]

See also: [El Stronato](/wiki/El_Stronato "El Stronato") and [Operation Condor](/wiki/Operation_Condor "Operation Condor")

A series of unstable governments ensued until the establishment in 1954 of the regime of dictator [Alfredo Stroessner](/wiki/Alfredo_Stroessner "Alfredo Stroessner"), who remained in office for more than three decades until 1989. Paraguay was modernized to some extent under Stroessner's regime, although his rule was marked by extensive human rights abuses.[[38]](#cite_note-46)

Stroessner and the *Colorado* party ruled the country from 1954 to 1989. The dictator oversaw an era of economic expansion, but also had a poor human rights and environmental record (see "Political History"). Paraguay actively participated in [Operation Condor](/wiki/Operation_Condor "Operation Condor").[[39]](#cite_note-47) Torture and death for political opponents was routine. After his overthrow, the *Colorado* continued to dominate national politics until 2008.

The splits in the *Colorado* Party in the 1980s, and the prevailing conditions – Stroessner's advanced age, the character of the regime, the economic downturn, and [international isolation](/wiki/International_isolation "International isolation") – were catalysts for anti-regime demonstrations and statements by the opposition prior to the 1988 general elections.[*[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")*]

*[PLRA](/wiki/Authentic_Radical_Liberal_Party "Authentic Radical Liberal Party")* leader [Domingo Laíno](/wiki/Domingo_La%C3%ADno "Domingo Laíno") served as the focal point of the opposition in the second half of the 1980s. The government's effort to isolate Laíno by exiling him in 1982 had backfired. On his sixth attempt to reenter the country in 1986, Laíno returned with three television crews from the U.S., a former United States ambassador to Paraguay, and a group of Uruguayan and Argentine congressmen. Despite the international contingent, the police violently barred Laíno's return.[[40]](#cite_note-48)

The Stroessner regime relented in April 1987, and permitted Laíno to return to Asunción. Laíno took the lead in organizing demonstrations and reducing infighting among the opposition party. The opposition was unable to reach agreement on a common strategy regarding the elections, with some parties advocating abstention, and others calling for blank voting. The parties held numerous 'lightning demonstrations' (*mítines relámpagos*), especially in rural areas. Such demonstrations were gathered and quickly disbanded before the arrival of the [police](/wiki/Police "Police").

In response to the upsurge in opposition activities, Stroessner condemned the Accord for advocating "sabotage of the general elections and disrespect of the law". He used national police and civilian [vigilantes](/wiki/Vigilantes "Vigilantes") of the *Colorado* Party to break up demonstrations. A number of opposition leaders were imprisoned or otherwise harassed. [Hermes Rafael Saguier](/w/index.php?title=Hermes_Rafael_Saguier&action=edit&redlink=1 "Hermes Rafael Saguier (page does not exist)") [[es](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hermes_Rafael_Saguier "es:Hermes Rafael Saguier")], another key leader of the *PLRA*, was imprisoned for four months in 1987 on charges of sedition. In early February 1988, police arrested 200 people attending a National Coordinating Committee meeting in [Coronel Oviedo](/wiki/Coronel_Oviedo "Coronel Oviedo"). Laíno and several other opposition figures were arrested before dawn on the day of the election, 14 February, and held for twelve hours. The government declared Stroessner's reelection with 89% of the vote.[[41]](#cite_note-49)

The opposition attributed the results in part to the virtual Colorado monopoly on the mass media. They noted that 53% of those polled indicated that there was an "uneasiness" in Paraguayan society. 74% believed that the political situation needed changes, including 45% who wanted a substantial or total change. Finally, 31% stated that they planned to abstain from voting in the February elections.[*[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")*]

### Stroessner's overthrow, post-1989

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=10 "Edit section: Stroessner's overthrow, post-1989")]

On 3 February 1989, Stroessner was overthrown in a military coup headed by General [Andrés Rodríguez](/wiki/Andr%C3%A9s_Rodr%C3%ADguez_(President) "Andrés Rodríguez (President)"). As president, Rodríguez instituted political, legal, and economic reforms and initiated a *rapprochement* with the international community. Reflecting the deep hunger of the rural poor for land, hundreds immediately occupied thousands of acres of unused territories belonging to Stroessner and his associates; by mid-1990, 19,000 families occupied 340,000 acres (138,000 ha). At the time, 2.06 million people lived in rural areas, more than half of the 4.1 million total population, and most were landless.[[42]](#cite_note-nagel-50)

The June 1992 constitution established a democratic system of government and dramatically improved protection of fundamental human rights. In May 1993, Colorado Party candidate [Juan Carlos Wasmosy](/wiki/Juan_Carlos_Wasmosy "Juan Carlos Wasmosy") was elected as Paraguay's first civilian president in almost forty years, in what international observers deemed free and fair elections.

With support from the United States, the Organization of American States, and other countries in the region, the Paraguayan people rejected an April 1996 attempt by then Army Chief General [Lino Oviedo](/wiki/Lino_Oviedo "Lino Oviedo") to oust President Wasmosy.

Oviedo was nominated as the Colorado candidate for president in the 1998 election. However, when the Supreme Court upheld in April his conviction on charges related to the 1996 coup attempt, he was not allowed to run and was detained in jail. His former running mate, [Raúl Cubas](/wiki/Ra%C3%BAl_Cubas "Raúl Cubas"), became the Colorado Party's candidate, and was elected in May in elections deemed by international observers to be free and fair. One of Cubas' first acts after taking office in August was to commute Oviedo's sentence and release him. In December 1998, Paraguay's Supreme Court declared these actions unconstitutional. In this tense atmosphere, the murder of Vice President and long-time Oviedo rival [Luis María Argaña](/wiki/Luis_Mar%C3%ADa_Arga%C3%B1a "Luis María Argaña") on 23 March 1999, led the Chamber of Deputies to impeach Cubas the next day.[*[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")*] On 26 March, eight student anti-government demonstrators were murdered, widely believed to have been carried out by Oviedo supporters. This increased opposition to Cubas, who resigned on 28 March. Senate President [Luis González Macchi](/wiki/Luis_Gonz%C3%A1lez_Macchi "Luis González Macchi"), a Cubas opponent, was peacefully sworn in as president the same day.

In 2003, [Nicanor Duarte](/wiki/Nicanor_Duarte "Nicanor Duarte") was elected as president.

### Election of Fernando Lugo

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=11 "Edit section: Election of Fernando Lugo")]

For the 2008 general elections, the Colorado Party was favored in polls. Their candidate was Minister of Education [Blanca Ovelar](/wiki/Blanca_Ovelar "Blanca Ovelar"), the first woman to be nominated as a candidate for a major party in Paraguayan history. After sixty years of Colorado rule, voters chose [Fernando Lugo](/wiki/Fernando_Lugo "Fernando Lugo"), a former Roman Catholic Bishop and not a professional politician in civil government, and a member of the Authentic Radical Liberal Party, Paraguay's largest opposition party. Lugo was an adherent of [liberation theology](/wiki/Liberation_theology "Liberation theology"). Lugo achieved a historic victory in Paraguay's presidential election, defeating the ruling party candidate, and ending 61 years of conservative rule. Lugo won with nearly 41% of the vote, compared to almost 31% for Blanca Ovelar of the Colorado party.[[43]](#cite_note-51) Outgoing President [Nicanor Duarte Frutos](/wiki/Nicanor_Duarte "Nicanor Duarte") hailed the moment as the first time in the history of the nation that a government had transferred power to opposition forces in a constitutional and peaceful fashion.[*[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")*]

Lugo was sworn in on 15 August 2008. The Lugo administration set its two major priorities as the reduction of corruption and economic inequality.[[44]](#cite_note-state.gov-52)

Political instability following Lugo's election and disputes within his cabinet encouraged some renewal of popular support for the Colorado Party. Reports suggested that the businessman [Horacio Cartes](/wiki/Horacio_Cartes "Horacio Cartes") became the new political figure amid disputes. Despite the US [Drug Enforcement Administration](/wiki/Drug_Enforcement_Administration "Drug Enforcement Administration")'s strong accusations against Cartes related to [drug trafficking](/wiki/Illegal_drug_trade "Illegal drug trade"), he continued to amass followers in the political arena.[*[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")*]

On 14 January 2011, the Colorado Party convention nominated Horacio Cartes as the presidential candidate for the party. However, the party's constitution did not allow it.[*[clarification needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Please_clarify "Wikipedia:Please clarify")*]
On 21 June 2012, [impeachment proceedings against President Lugo](/wiki/Impeachment_of_Fernando_Lugo "Impeachment of Fernando Lugo") began in the country's lower house, which was controlled by his opponents. Lugo was given less than twenty-four hours to prepare for the proceedings and only two hours in which to mount a defense.[[45]](#cite_note-Guardian-53) Impeachment was quickly approved and the resulting trial in Paraguay's Senate, also controlled by the opposition, ended with the removal of Lugo from office and Vice President Federico Franco assuming the duties of president.[[46]](#cite_note-CNN22-54) Lugo's rivals blamed him for the deaths of 17 people – eight police officers and nine farmers – in armed clashes after police were ambushed by armed peasants when enforcing an eviction order against rural trespassers.[[47]](#cite_note-55)

On 14 May 2011, Paraguay celebrated its [bicentenary](/wiki/Paraguay_Bicentennial "Paraguay Bicentennial") on the 200th anniversary of independence from the Spanish Empire as a sovereign state.

Lugo's supporters gathered outside Congress to protest the decision as a "politically motivated coup d'état".[[46]](#cite_note-CNN22-54) Lugo's removal from office on 22 June 2012 is considered by [UNASUR](/wiki/UNASUR "UNASUR") and other neighboring countries, especially those currently governed by leftist leaders, as a coup d'état.[[48]](#cite_note-56) However, the Organization of American States, which sent a mission to Paraguay to gather information, concluded that the impeachment process was not a coup d'état, as it had been carried out in accordance with the [Constitution of Paraguay](/wiki/Constitution_of_Paraguay "Constitution of Paraguay").[[49]](#cite_note-57)

### Present day

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=12 "Edit section: Present day")]

From August 2013 to 15 August 2018, the [President of Paraguay](/wiki/President_of_Paraguay "President of Paraguay") was [Horacio Cartes](/wiki/Horacio_Cartes "Horacio Cartes").[[50]](#cite_note-58) Since 15 August 2018, the [President of Paraguay](/wiki/President_of_Paraguay "President of Paraguay") has been [Mario Abdo Benítez](/wiki/Mario_Abdo_Ben%C3%ADtez "Mario Abdo Benítez"). They are both from the conservative [Colorado Party](/wiki/Colorado_Party_(Paraguay) "Colorado Party (Paraguay)").[[51]](#cite_note-59) President Mario Abdo enjoyed a close relationship with the Brazilian far-right president (in power 2019–2022), [Jair Bolsonaro](/wiki/Jair_Bolsonaro "Jair Bolsonaro").[[52]](#cite_note-60) In February 2019, President Mario Abdo Benitez was at Bolsonaro's side when Bolsonaro praised Paraguayan military dictator Alfredo Stroessner, calling him "a man of vision".[[53]](#cite_note-61) In 2021, Paraguay became the first country in South America to produce electric energy in its [100% renewable energy](/wiki/100%25_renewable_energy "100% renewable energy") supply. In May 2023, [Santiago Peña](/wiki/Santiago_Pe%C3%B1a "Santiago Peña") of the long-ruling Colorado Party, won the presidential [election](/wiki/2023_Paraguayan_general_election "2023 Paraguayan general election") to succeed Mario Abdo as the next [President of Paraguay](/wiki/President_of_Paraguay "President of Paraguay").[[54]](#cite_note-62) On 15 August 2023, Santiago Peña was sworn in as Paraguay's new president.[[55]](#cite_note-63)

Geography
---------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=13 "Edit section: Geography")]

Main article: [Geography of Paraguay](/wiki/Geography_of_Paraguay "Geography of Paraguay")

Paraguay is divided by the [Río Paraguay](/wiki/R%C3%ADo_Paraguay "Río Paraguay") into two well differentiated geographic regions. The eastern region (Región Oriental); and the western region, officially called Western Paraguay (Región Occidental) and also known as the Chaco, which is part of the [Gran Chaco](/wiki/Gran_Chaco "Gran Chaco"). The country lies between latitudes [19°](/wiki/19th_parallel_south "19th parallel south") and [28°S](/wiki/28th_parallel_south "28th parallel south"), and longitudes [54°](/wiki/54th_meridian_west "54th meridian west") and [63°W](/wiki/63rd_meridian_west "63rd meridian west").

The terrain consists mostly of grassy plains and wooded hills in the eastern region. To the west are mostly low, marshy plains. Paraguay contains six terrestrial ecoregions: [Alto Paraná Atlantic forests](/wiki/Alto_Paran%C3%A1_Atlantic_forests "Alto Paraná Atlantic forests"), [Chaco](/wiki/Gran_Chaco "Gran Chaco"), [Cerrado](/wiki/Cerrado "Cerrado"), [Humid Chaco](/wiki/Humid_Chaco "Humid Chaco"), [Pantanal](/wiki/Pantanal "Pantanal"), and [Paraná flooded savanna](/wiki/Paran%C3%A1_flooded_savanna "Paraná flooded savanna").[[56]](#cite_note-DinersteinOlson2017-64) It had a 2019 [Forest Landscape Integrity Index](/wiki/Forest_Landscape_Integrity_Index "Forest Landscape Integrity Index") mean score of 6.39/10, ranking it 74th globally out of 172 countries.[[57]](#cite_note-FLII-Supplementary-65) The [Guarani Aquifer](/wiki/Guarani_Aquifer "Guarani Aquifer") is an important [exorheic basin](/wiki/Open_and_closed_lakes "Open and closed lakes") to the region.[[58]](#cite_note-66)

Although Paraguay is landlocked, there are a number of noteworthy lakeside beaches.[[59]](#cite_note-67)

### Climate

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=14 "Edit section: Climate")]

Main article: [Climate of Paraguay](/wiki/Climate_of_Paraguay "Climate of Paraguay")

The overall climate is [tropical](/wiki/Tropical_climate "Tropical climate") to [subtropical](/wiki/Subtropical_climate "Subtropical climate"). Like most lands in the region, Paraguay has only wet and dry periods. Winds play a major role in influencing Paraguay's weather: between October and March, warm winds blow from the Amazon Basin in the north, while the period between May and August brings cold winds from the Andes.

The absence of mountain ranges to provide a natural barrier allows winds to develop speeds as high as 161 km/h (100 mph). This also leads to significant changes in temperature within a short span of time; between April and September, temperatures will sometimes drop below freezing. January is the hottest summer month, with an average daily temperature of 28.9 degrees Celsius (84 degrees F).

Rainfall varies dramatically across the country, with substantial rainfall in the eastern portions, and semi-arid conditions in the far west. The far eastern forest belt receives an average of 170 centimeters (67 inches) of rain annually, while the western Chaco region typically averages no more than 50 cm (20 in) a year. The rains in the west tend to be irregular and evaporate quickly, contributing to the aridity of the area.

### Fauna

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=15 "Edit section: Fauna")]

Wildlife in Paraguay include marsh deer, monkeys, armadillos, anteaters, otters, wild boars, tapirs, jaguars, ocelots, bats, and the [coypu](/wiki/Coypu "Coypu").

Government and politics
-----------------------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=16 "Edit section: Government and politics")]

Main articles: [Politics of Paraguay](/wiki/Politics_of_Paraguay "Politics of Paraguay"), [Human rights in Paraguay](/wiki/Human_rights_in_Paraguay "Human rights in Paraguay"), and [Foreign relations of Paraguay](/wiki/Foreign_relations_of_Paraguay "Foreign relations of Paraguay")

Paraguay is a [representative democratic](/wiki/Representative_democratic "Representative democratic") republic, with a [multi-party system](/wiki/Multi-party_system "Multi-party system") and [separation of powers](/wiki/Separation_of_powers "Separation of powers") across three branches. Executive power is exercised solely by the [President](/wiki/President_of_Paraguay "President of Paraguay"), who is [head of state](/wiki/Head_of_state "Head of state") and [head of government](/wiki/Head_of_government "Head of government"). [Legislative power](/wiki/Legislative_power "Legislative power") is vested in the two chambers of the [National Congress](/wiki/Congress_of_Paraguay "Congress of Paraguay"). The [judiciary](/wiki/Judicial_Branch "Judicial Branch") is vested on [tribunals](/wiki/Tribunals "Tribunals") and Courts of [Civil Law](/wiki/Civil_Law_(legal_system) "Civil Law (legal system)") and a nine-member Supreme Court of Justice, all of them independent of the executive and the legislature.

Since the end of the [1947 civil war](/wiki/Paraguayan_Civil_War_(1947) "Paraguayan Civil War (1947)"), the country's politics have generally been [dominated](/wiki/Dominant-party_system "Dominant-party system") by the conservative [Colorado Party](/wiki/Colorado_Party_(Paraguay) "Colorado Party (Paraguay)").

### Military

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=17 "Edit section: Military")]

Main article: [Armed Forces of Paraguay](/wiki/Armed_Forces_of_Paraguay "Armed Forces of Paraguay")

The [military of Paraguay](/wiki/Armed_Forces_of_Paraguay "Armed Forces of Paraguay") consist of an [army](/wiki/Army "Army"), [navy](/wiki/Navy "Navy") (including [naval aviation](/wiki/Naval_aviation "Naval aviation") and [marine corps](/wiki/Marines "Marines")) and [air force](/wiki/Air_force "Air force"). [Paraguay's constitution](/wiki/Constitution_of_Paraguay "Constitution of Paraguay") establishes the [president of Paraguay](/wiki/President_of_Paraguay "President of Paraguay") as [commander-in-chief](/wiki/Commander-in-chief "Commander-in-chief") of the armed forces.[[60]](#cite_note-68)

Paraguay has [compulsory military service](/wiki/Conscription "Conscription"); all 18-year-old males, as well as 17-year-old males in the year of their 18th birthday, are liable for one year of [active duty](/wiki/Active_duty "Active duty"). While the constitution allows for [conscientious objection](/wiki/Conscientious_objector "Conscientious objector"), no enabling legislation has yet been approved.

Paraguay has partnered with Argentina, Brazil, and the United States in regional anti-terrorism and anti-narcotics efforts.[[61]](#cite_note-69) In July 2005, U.S. [special forces](/wiki/Special_forces "Special forces") began arriving at Paraguay's [Mariscal Estigarribia](/wiki/Mariscal_Estigarribia "Mariscal Estigarribia") air base to support joint training and humanitarian operations[[62]](#cite_note-70)[[63]](#cite_note-Clarin-71) In 2019, Asuncion hosted the first meeting of the Regional Security Mechanism (RSM), which promotes cooperation between Paraguay, Argentina, Brazil, and the U.S. in addressing [transnational crime](/wiki/Transnational_crime "Transnational crime") and terrorism in the "triple frontier" region.[[64]](#cite_note-72)

Paraguay is the 73rd most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 [Global Peace Index](/wiki/Global_Peace_Index "Global Peace Index").[[65]](#cite_note-73)

### Administrative divisions

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=18 "Edit section: Administrative divisions")]

Main articles: [Departments of Paraguay](/wiki/Departments_of_Paraguay "Departments of Paraguay") and [Districts of Paraguay](/wiki/Districts_of_Paraguay "Districts of Paraguay")

Paraguay consists of seventeen departments and one capital district (*distrito capital*).

It is also divided into two regions: The "Occidental Region" or Chaco (Boquerón, Alto Paraguay and Presidente Hayes), and the "Oriental Region" (the other departments and the capital district).

These are the departments, with their capitals, population, area and the number of districts:

[Alto Paraguay](/wiki/Alto_Paraguay_Department "Alto Paraguay Department")

[Boquerón](/wiki/Boquer%C3%B3n_Department "Boquerón Department")

[Presidente Hayes](/wiki/Presidente_Hayes_Department "Presidente Hayes Department")

[Amambay](/wiki/Amambay_Department "Amambay Department")

[Concepción](/wiki/Concepci%C3%B3n_Department_(Paraguay) "Concepción Department (Paraguay)")

[San Pedro](/wiki/San_Pedro_Department,_Paraguay "San Pedro Department, Paraguay")

[Distrito Capital](/wiki/Asunci%C3%B3n "Asunción")

[Guairá](/wiki/Guair%C3%A1_Department "Guairá Department")

[Caazapá](/wiki/Caazap%C3%A1_Department "Caazapá Department")

[Alto  
Paraná](/wiki/Alto_Paran%C3%A1_Department "Alto Paraná Department")

[Caaguazú](/wiki/Caaguaz%C3%BA_Department "Caaguazú Department")

[Canindeyú](/wiki/Canindey%C3%BA_Department "Canindeyú Department")

[Itapúa](/wiki/Itap%C3%BAa_Department "Itapúa Department")

[Paraguarí](/wiki/Paraguar%C3%AD_Department "Paraguarí Department")

[Misiones](/wiki/Misiones_Department "Misiones Department")

[Ñeembucú](/wiki/%C3%91eembuc%C3%BA_Department "Ñeembucú Department")

[Cordillera](/wiki/Cordillera_Department "Cordillera Department")

[Central](/wiki/Central_Department "Central Department")

*[Brazil](/wiki/Brazil "Brazil")*

*[Bolivia](/wiki/Bolivia "Bolivia")*

*[Argentina](/wiki/Argentina "Argentina")*

Economy
-------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=19 "Edit section: Economy")]

Main article: [Economy of Paraguay](/wiki/Economy_of_Paraguay "Economy of Paraguay")

For many years, the country's image was associated with the [illicit trade](/wiki/Illicit_trade "Illicit trade") in [electronic products](/wiki/Electronics "Electronics"), [weapons](/wiki/Weapons "Weapons") and [drugs](/wiki/Drugs "Drugs"). However, this scenario began to change in the 2000s, with the rise of legalized businesses such as the production of soy, maize, beef, among others. Data from the Central Bank of Paraguay (BCP) showed that, in 2006, exports related to the triangulation trade (China-Paraguay-Brazil), treated by Brazil – in most cases – as smuggling and embezzlement, represented 22% of the country's GDP. In 2016, this percentage dropped to 12%. With higher tax collections through legalized employment, the country has been able to improve its infrastructure, which was precarious. Paraguay has an economic development policy based on exports and dependence on the Brazilian market prevails. The triangulation trade has in its essence the export of products originating in China, with Brazil as its main destination. The energy exported is essentially the hydroelectric surplus generated by the Itaipu Power Plant, for which Brazil is the main buyer. And maquilas, whose main investors are Brazilians, also have a large consumer market in Brazil for their products. Therefore, in these three pillars of Paraguay's development strategy, there is the outstanding characteristic of reexports. In the case of agricultural commodities, it is the export of products originating in Paraguay.[[66]](#cite_note-74)

In the 2010s, the economy, largely directed towards soybean production, grew by an average of 4%. The economic growth did not, however, reduce poverty, which in 2018, according to official figures, reached more than 26% of the population. According to *The New York Times*, Paraguay is "one of the Latin American countries where the gap between rich and poor has widened the most in recent years." In the countryside, 85% of agricultural land is owned by 2.6% of the owners. In addition, people of indigenous descent have been expelled to make way for soybean companies.[[67]](#cite_note-75)[[68]](#cite_note-76)

The [soybean](/wiki/Soybean "Soybean") export market is largely dominated by multinationals ([Cargill](/wiki/Cargill "Cargill"), [Archer Daniels Midland](/wiki/Archer_Daniels_Midland "Archer Daniels Midland"), [Bunge Limited](/wiki/Bunge_Limited "Bunge Limited"), etc.) and therefore benefits few Paraguayans. Export companies and landowners pay little tax. For example, a study by [ECLAC](/wiki/ECLAC "ECLAC") (a UN agency) released in 2018 indicates that Paraguay is one of the countries where companies participate the least in the state budget.[[69]](#cite_note-77)

[Pesticides](/wiki/Pesticide "Pesticide") and other [chemicals](/wiki/Chemicals "Chemicals") are used heavily in soybean fields. The country's environmental standards are not met by companies and agrochemicals contaminate the environment. In 2019, the [United Nations Human Rights Committee](/wiki/United_Nations_Human_Rights_Committee "United Nations Human Rights Committee") issued a ruling urging Paraguay to undertake an investigation into the massive fumigation of agrochemicals and the poisoning of the population. However, the situation is not improving: "The high level of political corruption, the extreme fragility of institutions, the high level of social vulnerability, the omnipotence of economic interests in political decisions, as well as the location [of the country] in the geographic heart of the Southern Cone and its abundance of natural resources, make Paraguay an attractive target for imperial geopolitical interests," says sociologist Tomás Palau.[[70]](#cite_note-78) Academic José Luis Insfrán also notes that the country's politicians "are subsidized by big business; they are the ones who implement the policies."

In 2005, the [International Monetary Fund](/wiki/International_Monetary_Fund "International Monetary Fund") stated that fewer than 10% of workers in Paraguay participate in the [pension](/wiki/Pension "Pension") system, 95% of which is administered by two institutions. Both are financed on a [pay as you go](/wiki/Pay-as-you-go_pension_plan "Pay-as-you-go pension plan") system by worker contributions; the first, [Instituto de Previsión Social](/w/index.php?title=Instituto_de_Previsi%C3%B3n_Social&action=edit&redlink=1 "Instituto de Previsión Social (page does not exist)") [[es](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instituto_de_Previsi%C3%B3n_Social_(Paraguay) "es:Instituto de Previsión Social (Paraguay)")] is for private sector employees, and the *caja fiscal* for public employees (including university professors, teachers, judicial employees, army officers and police officers) and veterans of the Chaco War (or their descendants).[[71]](#cite_note-79)

The market economy is distinguished by a large informal sector, featuring reexport of imported consumer goods to neighboring countries, as well as the activities of thousands of microenterprises and urban street vendors. Nonetheless, over the last 10 years the Paraguayan economy diversified dramatically, with the energy, auto parts and clothing industries leading the way.[[72]](#cite_note-80)

Paraguay's most important [urban areas](/wiki/Urban_area "Urban area") are located along the [Argentina-Paraguay border](/wiki/Argentina-Paraguay_border "Argentina-Paraguay border"): [Asunción](/wiki/Asunci%C3%B3n "Asunción"), [Alberdi](/wiki/Alberdi,_Paraguay "Alberdi, Paraguay"), [Encarnación](/wiki/Encarnaci%C3%B3n,_Paraguay "Encarnación, Paraguay"), [Pilar](/wiki/Pilar,_Paraguay "Pilar, Paraguay") and [Ciudad del Este](/wiki/Gran_Ciudad_del_Este "Gran Ciudad del Este"), the latter being the third most important free commercial zone in the world, only trailing behind [Miami](/wiki/Miami "Miami") and [Hong Kong](/wiki/Hong_Kong "Hong Kong").[[73]](#cite_note-81)[[74]](#cite_note-82) A large percentage of the population, especially in rural areas, derives its living from agricultural activity, often on a subsistence basis. Because of the importance of the informal sector, accurate economic measures are difficult to obtain. The economy grew rapidly between 2003 and 2013 as growing world demand for commodities combined with high prices and favorable weather to support Paraguay's commodity-based export expansion.

In 2012, Paraguay's government introduced the MERCOSUR (FOCEM) system in order to stimulate the economy and job growth through a partnership with both Brazil and Argentina.[[75]](#cite_note-83)[*[needs update](/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Dates_and_numbers#Chronological_items "Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Dates and numbers")*]

The [Central Bank of Paraguay](/wiki/Central_Bank_of_Paraguay "Central Bank of Paraguay") is Paraguay's highest monetary authority, and the country's governing body, in finances and economics. Its headquarters are in [Asunción](/wiki/Asunci%C3%B3n "Asunción")'s [Carmelitas](/wiki/Las_Lomas_(Asunci%C3%B3n) "Las Lomas (Asunción)") neighborhood.

### Agriculture

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=20 "Edit section: Agriculture")]

Paraguay is the sixth-largest [soybean](/wiki/Soybean "Soybean") producer in the world,[[76]](#cite_note-84) the second-largest producer of [stevia](/wiki/Stevia "Stevia") and the ninth-largest exporter of [beef](/wiki/Beef "Beef").[[77]](#cite_note-85)[[78]](#cite_note-86)

In 2018, in addition to soy, the country had a large production of [maize](/wiki/Maize "Maize") and [sugar cane](/wiki/Sugar_cane "Sugar cane"), where it positioned itself as the 21st largest producer in the world; other important cultures of the country are [cassava](/wiki/Cassava "Cassava"), [rice](/wiki/Rice "Rice"), [wheat](/wiki/Wheat "Wheat"), [orange](/wiki/Orange_(fruit) "Orange (fruit)"), [yerba mate](/wiki/Yerba_mate "Yerba mate"), and [sorghum](/wiki/Sorghum "Sorghum"). In livestock, Paraguay produced, in 2020, 481 thousand tons of beef, being the 26th largest producer in the world.[[79]](#cite_note-87)

Soy farming was largely introduced by Brazilians: in 2019, almost 70% of soy and rice producers in Paraguay were people from Brazil, or descendants of Brazilians (the so-called brasiguaios). The first Brazilian producers began to arrive in the country in the 1980s. Before the Brazilian influx, much of the land in Paraguay was uncultivated.[[80]](#cite_note-88)[[81]](#cite_note-89)[[82]](#cite_note-90)[[83]](#cite_note-91)[[84]](#cite_note-92)[[85]](#cite_note-93)[[86]](#cite_note-94)

More than 80% of the cultivable land is owned by 2.6% of landowners. Nearly 8 million hectares were illegally granted, in violation of the agrarian law, to regime supporters during the dictatorship of Alfredo Stroessner (1954–1989), and the state has done nothing since to identify the beneficiaries of this illicit enrichment. These owners include generals, businessmen, and politicians, former presidents of the Republic, Nicaraguan dictator [Anastasio Somoza Debayle](/wiki/Anastasio_Somoza_Debayle "Anastasio Somoza Debayle"), and even the ruling [Colorado Party](/wiki/Colorado_Party_(Paraguay) "Colorado Party (Paraguay)"). More than 130 peasant leaders have been assassinated since the fall of Stroessner in 1989.[[87]](#cite_note-:0-95)

The methods of appropriating land in Paraguay are numerous. Economist Luis Rojas says that the most common method is to buy land from small producers: "The peasant is offered a sum of money he has never seen in his life. He imagines it's a fortune, leaves for the city, spends it all in three or four months and makes the misery belts grow, because there is no work." Oxfam estimates that 900,000 people have been evicted from the countryside in the last ten years,[*[when?](/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Dates_and_numbers#Chronological_items "Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Dates and numbers")*] which represents nearly one-seventh of the population. This crowd of landless peasants is swelling the poverty belts around Asunción, the capital.[[87]](#cite_note-:0-95)

### Industry and manufacturing

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=21 "Edit section: Industry and manufacturing")]

The [World Bank](/wiki/World_Bank "World Bank") lists the top producing countries each year, based on the total value of production. By the 2019 list, Paraguay had the 79th most valuable industry in the world ($6.9 billion).[[88]](#cite_note-96) The country was the seventh largest producer of [soybean oil](/wiki/Soybean_oil "Soybean oil") in the world in 2018.[[89]](#cite_note-97)

The [mineral industry of Paraguay](/wiki/Mineral_industry_of_Paraguay "Mineral industry of Paraguay") produces about 25% of the country's [gross domestic product](/wiki/Gross_domestic_product "Gross domestic product") (GDP) and employs about 31% of the labor force. Production of [cement](/wiki/Cement "Cement"), [iron ore](/wiki/Iron_ore "Iron ore"), and [steel](/wiki/Steel "Steel") occurs commonly throughout Paraguay's industrial sector. The growth of the industry was further fueled by the [maquila](/wiki/Maquila "Maquila") industry, with large industrial complexes located in the eastern part of the country. Paraguay put in place many incentives aimed to attract industries to the country. One of them is the so-called "Maquila law" by which companies can relocate to Paraguay, enjoying minimal tax rates.[[90]](#cite_note-98)[[91]](#cite_note-99)

In the [pharmaceutical industry](/wiki/Pharmaceutical_industry "Pharmaceutical industry"), Paraguayan companies now[*[when?](/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Dates_and_numbers#Chronological_items "Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Dates and numbers")*] meet 70% of domestic consumption and have begun to export drugs. Paraguay is quickly[*[quantify](/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Dates_and_numbers "Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Dates and numbers")*] supplanting foreign suppliers in meeting the country's drug needs.[[92]](#cite_note-100) Strong growth also is evident in the production of edible oils, garments, organic sugar, meat processing, and steel.[[93]](#cite_note-101)

In 2003, manufacturing comprised 13.6% of the GDP and it employed about 11% of the working population in 2000. Paraguay's primary manufacturing focus is on food and beverages. Wood products, paper products, hides and furs, and nonmetallic mineral products also contribute to manufacturing totals. Steady growth in the manufacturing GDP during the 1990s (1.2% annually) laid the foundation for 2002 and 2003, when the annual growth rate rose to 2.5%.[[15]](#cite_note-auto-19) Paraguay was ranked 93rd in the [Global Innovation Index](/wiki/Global_Innovation_Index "Global Innovation Index") in 2024.[[94]](#cite_note-102)

#### Social issues of the indigenous

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=22 "Edit section: Social issues of the indigenous")]

Literacy rates have been extremely low among Paraguay's indigenous population, who had a literacy rate of 7.1% compared to the 51% rate of the general population as of the 2002 census.[[95]](#cite_note-paho-103)

Only 2.5% of Paraguay's indigenous population had access to clean drinking water and only 9.5% had electricity as of 2002[[update]](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit).[[95]](#cite_note-paho-103)

Infrastructure
--------------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=23 "Edit section: Infrastructure")]

### Transportation

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=24 "Edit section: Transportation")]

According to official data from the M.O.P.C (Ministry of Public Works and Communications of Paraguay), in 2019, there were a total of 78,850 km (48,995 mi) of roads, of which 10,372 km (6,445 mi) were paved.[[96]](#cite_note-104)[[97]](#cite_note-105) One of the most important recent investments in the country's history is the construction of the [Bioceanic Corridor](/wiki/Route_15_(Paraguay) "Route 15 (Paraguay)"), which will cross the north of Paraguay in a horizontal line, connecting Brazil to Argentina, reaching both the ports of northern Chile, as to Brazilian ports. The work will open a new route for exports of products to Asia, and will enable the development of an isolated region of Paraguay, the Chaco. In February 2022, Paraguay inaugurated 275 km of the road (about half of the route), connecting Carmelo Peralta (Alto Paraguay), on the border with Brazil, to Loma Plata (Boquerón), in the center of the country.[[98]](#cite_note-106) Paraguay has also been implementing the country's first [double highway](/wiki/Dual_carriageway "Dual carriageway"): 149 km of the [Route 2](/wiki/Route_2_(Paraguay) "Route 2 (Paraguay)"), which connects the capital Asunción to Ciudad del Este, on the border with Brazil (the highway that also connects with [port of Paranaguá](/wiki/Port_of_Paranagu%C3%A1 "Port of Paranaguá")). In January 2022, there were almost 100 km duplicated.[[99]](#cite_note-107)

The [Paraná-Paraguay system](/wiki/Paran%C3%A1_River "Paraná River") is a natural north–south downstream waterway of 1,600 km of a navigable network area, that gives the region direct access to the [ocean](/wiki/Atlantic_Ocean "Atlantic Ocean"), therefore, river transport is important and extensive, concentrating the most commercial maritime traffic to the [port of Buenos Aires](/wiki/Port_of_Buenos_Aires "Port of Buenos Aires"). Asunción is one of the main ports of Paraguay.[[100]](#cite_note-108)[[101]](#cite_note-109)[[102]](#cite_note-110)[[103]](#cite_note-111)

[Asunción airport](/wiki/Silvio_Pettirossi_International_Airport "Silvio Pettirossi International Airport") is an important stopover for international airlines and [Ciudad del Este airport](/wiki/Guaran%C3%AD_International_Airport "Guaraní International Airport"), is an important international air cargo hub.[[104]](#cite_note-112)

### Energy

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=25 "Edit section: Energy")]

Main article: [Energy in Paraguay](/wiki/Energy_in_Paraguay "Energy in Paraguay")

All of [Paraguay's electricity](/wiki/Electricity_sector_in_Paraguay "Electricity sector in Paraguay") is generated by [hydropower](/wiki/Hydroelectricity "Hydroelectricity"), making it one of the [cleanest in the world](/wiki/List_of_countries_by_electricity_production_from_renewable_sources "List of countries by electricity production from renewable sources").

Paraguay has an installed electrical production capacity of 8,110 MW, producing 63 billion [kWh](/wiki/Kilowatt-hour "Kilowatt-hour")/year in 2016; with domestic consumption of just 15 billion kWh, the excess production is sold to Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay, making Paraguay the world's largest exporter of electric power.[[105]](#cite_note-113) This production is from two large [hydroelectric power](/wiki/Hydroelectric_power "Hydroelectric power") projects along its borders, including the [Itaipu Dam](/wiki/Itaipu_Dam "Itaipu Dam"), the world's second largest generating station.

Demographics
------------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=26 "Edit section: Demographics")]

Main articles: [Demographics of Paraguay](/wiki/Demographics_of_Paraguay "Demographics of Paraguay") and [Immigration to Paraguay](/wiki/Immigration_to_Paraguay "Immigration to Paraguay")

See also: [List of most common surnames in Paraguay](/wiki/List_of_most_common_surnames_in_South_America#Paraguay "List of most common surnames in South America")

Paraguay's population is distributed unevenly through the country, with the vast majority of people living in the eastern region near the capital and largest city, [Asunción](/wiki/Asunci%C3%B3n "Asunción"), which accounts for 10% of the country's population. The [Gran Chaco](/wiki/Gran_Chaco "Gran Chaco") region, which includes the [Alto Paraguay](/wiki/Alto_Paraguay_Department "Alto Paraguay Department"), [Boquerón](/wiki/Boquer%C3%B3n_Department "Boquerón Department") and [Presidente Hayes Department](/wiki/Presidente_Hayes_Department "Presidente Hayes Department"), and accounts for about 60% of the territory, is home to less than 4% of the population. About 63% of Paraguayans live in urban areas, making Paraguay one of the least urbanized nations in South America.

For most of its history, Paraguay has been a recipient of immigrants owing to its low population density, especially after the demographic collapse caused by the Paraguayan War. Immigrants include [Italians](/wiki/Italians_in_Paraguay "Italians in Paraguay"), [Germans](/wiki/German_Paraguayans "German Paraguayans"), Spanish, [English](/wiki/English_people_in_Paraguay "English people in Paraguay"), Russians, [Koreans](/wiki/Koreans_in_Paraguay "Koreans in Paraguay"), Chinese, [Arab](/wiki/Lebanese_migration_to_Paraguay "Lebanese migration to Paraguay"), [Japanese](/wiki/Japanese_Paraguayans "Japanese Paraguayans"), [Ukrainians](/wiki/Ukrainians_in_Paraguay "Ukrainians in Paraguay"), [Poles](/wiki/Poles_(people) "Poles (people)"), [Jews](/wiki/Jews "Jews"), Brazilians, [Argentines](/wiki/Argentines "Argentines"), [Americans](/wiki/Americans "Americans"), [Bolivians](/wiki/Bolivians "Bolivians"), [Venezuelans](/wiki/Venezuelans "Venezuelans"), [Mexicans](/wiki/Mexicans "Mexicans"), [Chileans](/wiki/Chileans "Chileans"), [Taiwanese](/wiki/Taiwanese_people "Taiwanese people"), [Asian people](/wiki/Asian_people "Asian people") and [Uruguayans](/wiki/Uruguayans "Uruguayans").[[106]](#cite_note-114)[[107]](#cite_note-115) Along with [German Argentines](/wiki/German_Argentines "German Argentines"), German Paraguayans are one of the most prominent and growing [German](/wiki/Germans_in_Paraguay "Germans in Paraguay") communities in South America, with some 25,000 German-speaking [Mennonites](/wiki/Mennonites_in_Paraguay "Mennonites in Paraguay") living in the Paraguayan [Chaco](/wiki/Gran_Chaco "Gran Chaco").[[108]](#cite_note-116)[[109]](#cite_note-117) German settlers founded several towns, such as [Hohenau](/wiki/Hohenau,_Paraguay "Hohenau, Paraguay"), [Filadelfia](/wiki/Filadelfia "Filadelfia"), [Neuland](/wiki/Neuland_Colony "Neuland Colony"), [Obligado](/wiki/Obligado "Obligado") and [Nueva Germania](/wiki/Nueva_Germania "Nueva Germania"). Several websites that promote German immigration to Paraguay claim that 5–7% of the population is of German ancestry,[*[dubious](/wiki/Wikipedia:Accuracy_dispute#Disputed_statement "Wikipedia:Accuracy dispute") – [discuss](/wiki/Talk:Paraguay#Dubious "Talk:Paraguay")*] including 150,000 people of German-Brazilian descent.[*[better source needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:NOTRS "Wikipedia:NOTRS")*][[110]](#cite_note-118)[[111]](#cite_note-119)[[112]](#cite_note-120)[[113]](#cite_note-121)[[114]](#cite_note-122) Similarly, from the 1920–30s, Paraguay received [waves](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inmigraci%C3%B3n_eslava_en_Paraguay "es:Inmigración eslava en Paraguay") of [Slavic immigrants](/wiki/Slavs "Slavs") who settled in Asunción and Southern Paraguay ([Itapúa](/wiki/Itap%C3%BAa_Department "Itapúa Department"), [Misiones](/wiki/Misiones_Department "Misiones Department") and [Ñeembucú](/wiki/%C3%91eembuc%C3%BA_Department "Ñeembucú Department")), especially in the towns of [Fram](/wiki/Fram,_Paraguay "Fram, Paraguay"), [Coronel Bogado](/wiki/Coronel_Bogado "Coronel Bogado"), [Encarnación](/wiki/Encarnaci%C3%B3n,_Paraguay "Encarnación, Paraguay"), [San Juan del Paraná](/wiki/San_Juan_del_Paran%C3%A1 "San Juan del Paraná"), [San Ignacio](/wiki/San_Ignacio,_Paraguay "San Ignacio, Paraguay"), and [Pilar](/wiki/Pilar,_Paraguay "Pilar, Paraguay").[[115]](#cite_note-123)[[116]](#cite_note-124) Paraguay has also been a haven for communities persecuted for the religious faith, like the [Bruderhof](/wiki/Bruderhof_Communities "Bruderhof Communities") who were forced to leave England in 1941 because of their pacifist beliefs.[[117]](#cite_note-125)[[118]](#cite_note-126) Many of these communities have retained their languages and culture, particularly the [Brazilians](/wiki/Brazilian_people "Brazilian people"), who represent the largest and most prominent immigrant group, at around 400,000.[[119]](#cite_note-127) Many Brazilian Paraguayans are of German, Italian and Polish descent.[[120]](#cite_note-128) There are an estimated 8,000 [Afro-Paraguayans](/wiki/Afro-Paraguayans "Afro-Paraguayans"), comprising 0.13% of the population.[*[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")*]

There is no official data on the ethnic composition of the Paraguayan population, as the Department of Statistics, Surveys and Censuses of Paraguay does not ask about *race* and *ethnicity* in census surveys, although it does inquire about the indigenous population. According to the 2022 census, indigenous people made up 2.3% of Paraguay's total population.[[5]](#cite_note-population-7)

Traditionally, the majority of the Paraguayan population is considered mixed (*mestizo* in Spanish). According to the 2022 census, Paraguay has a population of 6 109 944, of which 95% are Mestizo/White and 5% are labeled "other", which includes members of 17 distinct ethnolinguistic indigenous groups.[[121]](#cite_note-indigenous-129)

### Religion

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=27 "Edit section: Religion")]

Main article: [Religion in Paraguay](/wiki/Religion_in_Paraguay "Religion in Paraguay")

Christianity, particularly [Catholicism](/wiki/Catholicism "Catholicism"), is the dominant religion in Paraguay.[[122]](#cite_note-130) According to the 2002 census, 89.9% of the population was Catholic, 6.2% was [Evangelical Protestant](/wiki/Evangelicalism "Evangelicalism"), 1.1% identified with other Christian sects, and 0.6% practiced indigenous religions. A U.S. State Department report on Religious Freedom names Catholicism, evangelical Protestantism, mainline Protestantism, Judaism (Orthodox, Conservative, and Reform), [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints](/wiki/The_Church_of_Jesus_Christ_of_Latter-day_Saints "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"), and the [Baháʼí Faith](/wiki/Bah%C3%A1%CA%BC%C3%AD_Faith "Baháʼí Faith") as prominent religious groups. It also mentions a large Muslim community in [Alto Paraná](/wiki/Alto_Paran%C3%A1 "Alto Paraná") (as a result of Middle-Eastern immigration, especially from [Lebanon](/wiki/Lebanon "Lebanon")) and a prominent Mennonite community in Boquerón.[[123]](#cite_note-state1-131)

### Languages

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=28 "Edit section: Languages")]

Main article: [Languages of Paraguay](/wiki/Languages_of_Paraguay "Languages of Paraguay")

Paraguay is a bilingual nation. Both Spanish and [Guaraní](/wiki/Guarani_language "Guarani language") are official languages. The Guaraní language is a remarkable trace of the indigenous Guaraní culture that has endured in Paraguay. Guaraní claims its place as one of the last surviving and thriving South American indigenous national languages.[[124]](#cite_note-132) In 2015, Spanish was spoken by about 87% of the population, while Guaraní is spoken by more than 90%, or slightly more than 5.8 million speakers. 52% of rural Paraguayans are bilingual in Guaraní. While Guaraní is still widely spoken, Spanish is generally given a preferential treatment in government, business, media and education as one of South America's [lingua francas](/wiki/Lingua_franca "Lingua franca").[[125]](#cite_note-ethnologue-list-133)[[126]](#cite_note-134)[[127]](#cite_note-135)[[128]](#cite_note-136)

[Portuguese](/wiki/Portuguese_language "Portuguese language") is the third most used language, spoken by 10% in the country, mostly in the departments bordering Brazil.[[125]](#cite_note-ethnologue-list-133) It's spoken by the so-called "[Brasiguayos](/wiki/Brasiguayos "Brasiguayos")", Brazilians or descendants who crossed west of the border from the 1970's seeking cheap land.[[129]](#cite_note-137)

There are also approximately 19 indigenous languages spoken in Paraguay, many of which are threatened by extinction. Languages such as Guana, Ayoreo, and Ishir (Chamacoco) are considered endangered.[[130]](#cite_note-138)

### Education

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=29 "Edit section: Education")]

Main article: [Education in Paraguay](/wiki/Education_in_Paraguay "Education in Paraguay")

See also: [List of universities in Paraguay](/wiki/List_of_universities_in_Paraguay "List of universities in Paraguay") and [List of high schools in Paraguay](/wiki/List_of_high_schools_in_Paraguay "List of high schools in Paraguay")

[Literacy](/wiki/Literacy "Literacy") was about 93.6% and 87.7% of Paraguayans finish the fifth grade according to [UNESCO](/wiki/UNESCO "UNESCO")'s last Educational Development Index 2008. Literacy does not differ much by gender.[[131]](#cite_note-hdrstats.undp.org-139) A more recent study[[132]](#cite_note-abc.com.py-140) reveals that attendance at primary school by children between 6 and 12 years old is about 98%. Primary education is free, mandatory and takes nine years. Secondary education takes three years.[[131]](#cite_note-hdrstats.undp.org-139)

Main universities, all in the capital city, in Paraguay include:

* [National University of Asunción](/wiki/National_University_of_Asunci%C3%B3n "National University of Asunción") (public and founded in 1889)[[133]](#cite_note-141)
* [Autonomous University of Asunción](/wiki/Autonomous_University_of_Asunci%C3%B3n "Autonomous University of Asunción") (private and founded in 1979)[[134]](#cite_note-142)
* [Universidad Católica Nuestra Señora de la Asunción](/wiki/Universidad_Cat%C3%B3lica_Nuestra_Se%C3%B1ora_de_la_Asunci%C3%B3n "Universidad Católica Nuestra Señora de la Asunción") (private and run by the church).[[135]](#cite_note-143)
* [Universidad Americana](/wiki/Universidad_Americana "Universidad Americana") (private).
* [Universidad del Pacífico](/w/index.php?title=Universidad_del_Pac%C3%ADfico_(Paraguay)&action=edit&redlink=1 "Universidad del Pacífico (Paraguay) (page does not exist)") (private and founded in 1991).

The net primary enrollment rate was at 88% in 2005.[[131]](#cite_note-hdrstats.undp.org-139) Public expenditure on education was about 4.3% of GDP in the early 2000s.[[131]](#cite_note-hdrstats.undp.org-139)

### Health

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=30 "Edit section: Health")]

Main article: [Health in Paraguay](/wiki/Health_in_Paraguay "Health in Paraguay")

Average life expectancy in Paraguay is rather high given its poverty: as of 2006[[update]](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit), it was 75 years,[[136]](#cite_note-144) equivalent to far wealthier Argentina, and the eighth highest in the Americas according to World Health Organization. Public expenditure on health is 2.6% of [GDP](/wiki/Gross_domestic_product "Gross domestic product"), while private health expenditure is 5.1%.[[131]](#cite_note-hdrstats.undp.org-139) Infant mortality was 20 per 1,000 births in 2005.[[131]](#cite_note-hdrstats.undp.org-139) Maternal mortality was 150 per 100,000 live births in 2000.[[131]](#cite_note-hdrstats.undp.org-139)

The [World Bank](/wiki/World_Bank "World Bank") has helped the Paraguayan government reduce the country's maternal and infant mortality. The *Mother and Child Basic Health Insurance Project* aimed to contribute to reducing mortality by increasing the use of selected life-saving services included in the country's Mother and Child Basic Health Insurance Program (MCBI) by women of child-bearing age, and children under age six in selected areas. To this end, the project also targeted improving the quality and efficiency of the health service network within certain areas, in addition to increasing the Ministry of Public Health and Social Welfare's (MSPandBS) management.[[137]](#cite_note-145)

Culture
-------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=31 "Edit section: Culture")]

Main article: [Culture of Paraguay](/wiki/Culture_of_Paraguay "Culture of Paraguay")

See also: [Music of Paraguay](/wiki/Music_of_Paraguay "Music of Paraguay"), [Cinema of Paraguay](/wiki/Cinema_of_Paraguay "Cinema of Paraguay"), and [Paraguayan cuisine](/wiki/Paraguayan_cuisine "Paraguayan cuisine")

Paraguay's cultural heritage can be traced to the extensive [intermarriage](/wiki/Interracial_marriage "Interracial marriage") between the original male Spanish settlers and indigenous [Guaraní](/wiki/Guarani_people "Guarani people") women. Their culture is highly influenced by various European countries, including Spain. Therefore, the Paraguayan culture is a fusion of two cultures and traditions; one European, the other, Southern Guaraní. Although this is common throughout the country, it is more visible around the towns of [Atyrá](/wiki/Atyr%C3%A1 "Atyrá"), [Tobatí](/wiki/Tobat%C3%AD "Tobatí") and [Altos](/wiki/Altos,_Paraguay "Altos, Paraguay"). More than 93% of Paraguayans are *[mestizos](/wiki/Mestizos "Mestizos")*, making Paraguay one of the most homogeneous countries in Latin America. A characteristic of this cultural fusion is the extensive bilingualism present to this day: more than 80% of Paraguayans speak both Spanish and the indigenous language, [Guaraní](/wiki/Guaran%C3%AD_language "Guaraní language"). [Jopara](/wiki/Jopara "Jopara"), a mixture of Guaraní and Spanish, is also widely spoken.[*[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")*]

This cultural fusion is expressed in arts such as embroidery (*ao po'í*) and [lace making](/wiki/Nanduti "Nanduti") (*ñandutí*). The [music of Paraguay](/wiki/Music_of_Paraguay "Music of Paraguay"), which consists of lilting polkas, bouncy *galopas,* and languid *[guaranias](/wiki/Guarania_(music) "Guarania (music)")* is played on the native harp. Paraguay's culinary heritage is also deeply influenced by this cultural fusion. Several popular dishes contain [manioc](/wiki/Manioc "Manioc"), a local staple crop similar to the [yuca](/wiki/Cassava "Cassava") also known as Cassava root found in the [Southwestern United States](/wiki/Southwestern_United_States "Southwestern United States") and Mexico, as well as other indigenous ingredients. A popular dish is *[sopa paraguaya](/wiki/Sopa_paraguaya "Sopa paraguaya")*, similar to a thick [corn bread](/wiki/Corn_bread "Corn bread"). Another notable food is *[chipa](/wiki/Chipa "Chipa")*, a [bagel](/wiki/Bagel "Bagel")-like bread made from [cornmeal](/wiki/Cornmeal "Cornmeal"), manioc, and cheese. Many other dishes consist of different kinds of cheeses, onions, bell peppers, cottage cheese, cornmeal, milk, seasonings, butter, eggs and fresh corn kernels.

The 1950s and 1960s were the time of the birth of a new generation of Paraguayan novelists and poets such as [José Ricardo Mazó](/wiki/Jos%C3%A9_Ricardo_Maz%C3%B3 "José Ricardo Mazó"), [Roque Vallejos](/wiki/Roque_Vallejos "Roque Vallejos"), and Nobel Prize nominee [Augusto Roa Bastos](/wiki/Augusto_Roa_Bastos "Augusto Roa Bastos"). Several [Paraguayan films](/wiki/Cinema_of_Paraguay "Cinema of Paraguay") have been made.

Inside the family, conservative values predominate. In lower classes, [godparents](/wiki/Godparent "Godparent") have a special relationship to the family, since they are typically chosen because of their favourable social position, in order to provide extra security for the children. Particular respect is owed them, in return for which the family can expect protection and patronage.[[138]](#cite_note-146)

The most popular instruments in Paraguayan music are the harp and the guitar. The native genres are the Paraguayan polka and the guarania, characterized by a slow song that was developed by José Asunción Flores around the 1920s.[[139]](#cite_note-147)[[140]](#cite_note-148)

### Media

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=32 "Edit section: Media")]

Main article: [Media of Paraguay](/wiki/Media_of_Paraguay "Media of Paraguay")

### Sports

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=33 "Edit section: Sports")]

Main article: [Sport in Paraguay](/wiki/Sport_in_Paraguay "Sport in Paraguay")

Sports are integral to the national culture; [soccer](/wiki/Soccer "Soccer") and
[basketball](/wiki/Basketball "Basketball") are most popular.[[141]](#cite_note-Paraguay_in_Pictures-149) Other sports such as [volleyball](/wiki/Volleyball "Volleyball"), [handball](/wiki/Handball "Handball"), [futsal](/wiki/Futsal "Futsal"), [swimming](/wiki/Swimming_(sport) "Swimming (sport)") and [tennis](/wiki/Tennis "Tennis") are also popular.[[141]](#cite_note-Paraguay_in_Pictures-149)

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=34 "Edit section: See also")]

* [Paraguay portal](/wiki/Portal:Paraguay "Portal:Paraguay")
* [Latin America portal](/wiki/Portal:Latin_America "Portal:Latin America")

* [Bibliography of Paraguay](/wiki/Bibliography_of_Paraguay "Bibliography of Paraguay")
* [Index of Paraguay-related articles](/wiki/Index_of_Paraguay-related_articles "Index of Paraguay-related articles")
* [Outline of Paraguay](/wiki/Outline_of_Paraguay "Outline of Paraguay")

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=35 "Edit section: Notes")]

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=36 "Edit section: References")]

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&action=edit&section=37 "Edit section: External links")]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to [Paraguay](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Paraguay "commons:Category:Paraguay").

Wikinews has news related to:

***[Paraguay](https://en.wikinews.org/wiki/Category:Paraguay "wikinews:Category:Paraguay")***

Government

* ["Chief of State and Cabinet Members"](https://web.archive.org/web/20100528053421/https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/world-leaders-1/world-leaders-p/paraguay.html). U.S. [Central Intelligence Agency](/wiki/Central_Intelligence_Agency "Central Intelligence Agency"). Archived from [the original](https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/world-leaders-1/world-leaders-p/paraguay.html) on 28 May 2010.
* ["National Department of Tourism"](http://www.senatur.gov.py/) (in Spanish).
* ["Ministry of Finance with economic and government information"](http://www.hacienda.gov.py/) (in Spanish and English). — also available in English

General information

* ["Paraguay"](https://www.britannica.com/place/Paraguay). *[Encyclopædia Britannica](/wiki/Encyclop%C3%A6dia_Britannica "Encyclopædia Britannica")*. 29 June 2023.
* [*Paraguay*](https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/paraguay/). [The World Factbook](/wiki/The_World_Factbook "The World Factbook"). [Central Intelligence Agency](/wiki/Central_Intelligence_Agency "Central Intelligence Agency"). August 2023.
* ["Paraguay"](https://web.archive.org/web/20080607085416/http://ucblibraries.colorado.edu/govpubs/for/paraguay.htm). Government Publications. UCB Libraries. Bolder, CO: [University of Colorado](/wiki/University_of_Colorado "University of Colorado"). Archived from [the original](http://ucblibraries.colorado.edu/govpubs/for/paraguay.htm) on 7 June 2008.
* ["Paraguay"](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/country_profiles/1222081.stm). Country profile. [BBC News](/wiki/BBC_News "BBC News"). 3 July 2012.
* [Wikimedia Atlas of Paraguay](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Atlas_of_Paraguay "commons:Atlas of Paraguay")
* Geographic data related to [Paraguay](https://www.openstreetmap.org/relation/287077) at [OpenStreetMap](/wiki/OpenStreetMap "OpenStreetMap")
* ["Key development forecasts for Paraguay"](http://www.ifs.du.edu/ifs/frm_CountryProfile.aspx?Country=PY). *[International Futures](/wiki/International_Futures "International Futures") (ifs.du.edu)*. Denver, CO: [University of Denver](/wiki/University_of_Denver "University of Denver").
* ["Paraguay"](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/1911_Encyclop%C3%A6dia_Britannica/Paraguay). *[Encyclopædia Britannica](/wiki/Encyclop%C3%A6dia_Britannica_Eleventh_Edition "Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition")*. Vol. 20 (11th ed.). 1911. pp. 756–759. (includes commerce data for the early 20th century)

News media

* ["La Rueda – Weekly reviews"](https://web.archive.org/web/20090916131713/http://www.larueda.com.py/) (in Spanish). Archived from [the original](http://www.larueda.com.py/) on 16 September 2009.
* ["ABC Color Paraguay"](http://www.abc.com.py/) (in Spanish).
* ["Última Hora"](https://web.archive.org/web/20081201100434/http://www.ultimahora.com.py/) (in Spanish). Archived from [the original](http://www.ultimahora.com.py/) on 1 December 2008. Retrieved 26 September 2008.
* ["La Nación"](http://www.lanacion.com.py/) (in Spanish).
* ["Paraguay.com"](http://www.paraguay.com/) (in Spanish).
* ["Ñanduti"](http://www.nanduti.com.py/) (in Spanish).
* ["Paraguayan Pymes News"](https://web.archive.org/web/20200604075323/http://www.mipyme.com.py/) (in Spanish). Archived from [the original](http://www.mipyme.com.py/) on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 14 April 2019.

Trade

* [Summary Trade Statistics Paraguay](http://wits.worldbank.org/CountryProfile/Country/PRY/Year/2012/Summary). *wits.worldbank.org* (Report). [World Bank](/wiki/World_Bank "World Bank"). 2012.
* ["Exchange rate of the Guaraní – Paraguayan currency"](https://web.archive.org/web/20190414174336/https://www.tipo-de-cambio.com/paraguay/cotizacion-de-monedas-en-paraguay-casa-de-cambios-alberdi-chaco-cde-encarnacion-y-asuncion/). *Tipo de Cambio de Monedas*. 10 March 2019. Archived from [the original](https://www.tipo-de-cambio.com/paraguay/cotizacion-de-monedas-en-paraguay-casa-de-cambios-alberdi-chaco-cde-encarnacion-y-asuncion/) on 14 April 2019.

Travel

* ["Tradition, Culture, Maps, Tourism"](http://www.Paraguay.com/). *Paraguay.com*.
* [Paraguay](https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Paraguay#Q733 "voy:Paraguay") travel guide from Wikivoyage
* ["Tourism in Paraguay, information, pictures and more"](https://web.archive.org/web/20081202113657/http://www.turismo.com.py/). *Turismo.com.py* (in Spanish). Archived from [the original](http://www.turismo.com.py/) on 2 December 2008.

[23°S 58°W﻿ / ﻿23°S 58°W﻿ / -23; -58](https://geohack.toolforge.org/geohack.php?pagename=Paraguay&params=23_S_58_W_)

Retrieved from "<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paraguay&oldid=1289055928>"

[Categories](/wiki/Help:Category "Help:Category"):

* [Paraguay](/wiki/Category:Paraguay "Category:Paraguay")
* [Countries in South America](/wiki/Category:Countries_in_South_America "Category:Countries in South America")
* [1811 establishments in South America](/wiki/Category:1811_establishments_in_South_America "Category:1811 establishments in South America")
* [States and territories established in 1811](/wiki/Category:States_and_territories_established_in_1811 "Category:States and territories established in 1811")
* [Former Spanish colonies](/wiki/Category:Former_Spanish_colonies "Category:Former Spanish colonies")
* [Landlocked countries](/wiki/Category:Landlocked_countries "Category:Landlocked countries")
* [Member states of Mercosur](/wiki/Category:Member_states_of_Mercosur "Category:Member states of Mercosur")
* [Member states of the United Nations](/wiki/Category:Member_states_of_the_United_Nations "Category:Member states of the United Nations")
* [Republics](/wiki/Category:Republics "Category:Republics")
* [Spanish-speaking countries and territories](/wiki/Category:Spanish-speaking_countries_and_territories "Category:Spanish-speaking countries and territories")

Hidden categories:

* [Pages using the Phonos extension](/wiki/Category:Pages_using_the_Phonos_extension "Category:Pages using the Phonos extension")
* [Pages with Spanish IPA](/wiki/Category:Pages_with_Spanish_IPA "Category:Pages with Spanish IPA")
* [Pages including recorded pronunciations](/wiki/Category:Pages_including_recorded_pronunciations "Category:Pages including recorded pronunciations")
* [Articles containing Spanish-language text](/wiki/Category:Articles_containing_Spanish-language_text "Category:Articles containing Spanish-language text")
* [Articles containing Guarani-language text](/wiki/Category:Articles_containing_Guarani-language_text "Category:Articles containing Guarani-language text")
* [All articles with unsourced statements](/wiki/Category:All_articles_with_unsourced_statements "Category:All articles with unsourced statements")
* [Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_unsourced_statements_from_June_2023 "Category:Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023")
* [CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)](/wiki/Category:CS1_Spanish-language_sources_(es) "Category:CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)")
* [CS1 Latin-language sources (la)](/wiki/Category:CS1_Latin-language_sources_(la) "Category:CS1 Latin-language sources (la)")
* [CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list](/wiki/Category:CS1_maint:_multiple_names:_authors_list "Category:CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list")
* [CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of November 2024](/wiki/Category:CS1_maint:_DOI_inactive_as_of_November_2024 "Category:CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of November 2024")
* [Webarchive template wayback links](/wiki/Category:Webarchive_template_wayback_links "Category:Webarchive template wayback links")
* [CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)](/wiki/Category:CS1_Portuguese-language_sources_(pt) "Category:CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)")
* [CS1: unfit URL](/wiki/Category:CS1:_unfit_URL "Category:CS1: unfit URL")
* [CS1 Guarani-language sources (gn)](/wiki/Category:CS1_Guarani-language_sources_(gn) "Category:CS1 Guarani-language sources (gn)")
* [CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br)](/wiki/Category:CS1_Brazilian_Portuguese-language_sources_(pt-br) "Category:CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br)")
* [CS1 errors: periodical ignored](/wiki/Category:CS1_errors:_periodical_ignored "Category:CS1 errors: periodical ignored")
* [CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown](/wiki/Category:CS1_maint:_bot:_original_URL_status_unknown "Category:CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown")
* [Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas](/wiki/Category:Pages_using_gadget_WikiMiniAtlas "Category:Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas")
* [Articles with short description](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_short_description "Category:Articles with short description")
* [Short description is different from Wikidata](/wiki/Category:Short_description_is_different_from_Wikidata "Category:Short description is different from Wikidata")
* [Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages](/wiki/Category:Wikipedia_indefinitely_move-protected_pages "Category:Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages")
* [Use dmy dates from March 2024](/wiki/Category:Use_dmy_dates_from_March_2024 "Category:Use dmy dates from March 2024")
* [Use American English from March 2024](/wiki/Category:Use_American_English_from_March_2024 "Category:Use American English from March 2024")
* [All Wikipedia articles written in American English](/wiki/Category:All_Wikipedia_articles_written_in_American_English "Category:All Wikipedia articles written in American English")
* [Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the flag caption or type parameters](/wiki/Category:Pages_using_infobox_country_or_infobox_former_country_with_the_flag_caption_or_type_parameters "Category:Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the flag caption or type parameters")
* [Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters](/wiki/Category:Pages_using_infobox_country_or_infobox_former_country_with_the_symbol_caption_or_type_parameters "Category:Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters")
* [Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_unsourced_statements_from_January_2010 "Category:Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010")
* [Articles with unsourced statements from September 2008](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_unsourced_statements_from_September_2008 "Category:Articles with unsourced statements from September 2008")
* [Articles with unsourced statements from March 2010](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_unsourced_statements_from_March_2010 "Category:Articles with unsourced statements from March 2010")
* [Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_unsourced_statements_from_July_2021 "Category:Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021")
* [Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2012](/wiki/Category:Wikipedia_articles_needing_clarification_from_April_2012 "Category:Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2012")
* [Wikipedia articles in need of updating from July 2021](/wiki/Category:Wikipedia_articles_in_need_of_updating_from_July_2021 "Category:Wikipedia articles in need of updating from July 2021")
* [All Wikipedia articles in need of updating](/wiki/Category:All_Wikipedia_articles_in_need_of_updating "Category:All Wikipedia articles in need of updating")
* [All articles with vague or ambiguous time](/wiki/Category:All_articles_with_vague_or_ambiguous_time "Category:All articles with vague or ambiguous time")
* [Vague or ambiguous time from November 2023](/wiki/Category:Vague_or_ambiguous_time_from_November_2023 "Category:Vague or ambiguous time from November 2023")
* [Vague or ambiguous time from February 2016](/wiki/Category:Vague_or_ambiguous_time_from_February_2016 "Category:Vague or ambiguous time from February 2016")
* [Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_unsourced_statements_from_February_2016 "Category:Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016")
* [Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2002](/wiki/Category:Articles_containing_potentially_dated_statements_from_2002 "Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2002")
* [All articles containing potentially dated statements](/wiki/Category:All_articles_containing_potentially_dated_statements "Category:All articles containing potentially dated statements")
* [Articles needing additional references from April 2014](/wiki/Category:Articles_needing_additional_references_from_April_2014 "Category:Articles needing additional references from April 2014")
* [All articles needing additional references](/wiki/Category:All_articles_needing_additional_references "Category:All articles needing additional references")
* [Articles lacking reliable references from April 2014](/wiki/Category:Articles_lacking_reliable_references_from_April_2014 "Category:Articles lacking reliable references from April 2014")
* [All articles lacking reliable references](/wiki/Category:All_articles_lacking_reliable_references "Category:All articles lacking reliable references")
* [Articles with multiple maintenance issues](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_multiple_maintenance_issues "Category:Articles with multiple maintenance issues")
* [All accuracy disputes](/wiki/Category:All_accuracy_disputes "Category:All accuracy disputes")
* [Articles with disputed statements from April 2014](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_disputed_statements_from_April_2014 "Category:Articles with disputed statements from April 2014")
* [Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_unsourced_statements_from_November_2024 "Category:Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024")
* [Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006](/wiki/Category:Articles_containing_potentially_dated_statements_from_2006 "Category:Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006")
* [Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_unsourced_statements_from_May_2014 "Category:Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014")
* [Commons category link is on Wikidata](/wiki/Category:Commons_category_link_is_on_Wikidata "Category:Commons category link is on Wikidata")
* [Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference](/wiki/Category:Wikipedia_articles_incorporating_a_citation_from_the_1911_Encyclopaedia_Britannica_with_Wikisource_reference "Category:Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference")
* [Coordinates on Wikidata](/wiki/Category:Coordinates_on_Wikidata "Category:Coordinates on Wikidata")

Paraguay

[Add topic](#)