[Jump to content](#bodyContent)

Lombok
======

[Coordinates](/wiki/Geographic_coordinate_system "Geographic coordinate system"): [8°33′54″S 116°21′04″E﻿ / ﻿8.565°S 116.351°E﻿ / -8.565; 116.351](https://geohack.toolforge.org/geohack.php?pagename=Lombok&params=8.565_S_116.351_E_type:isle_scale:1000000)

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Island in West Nusa Tenggara, Indonesia

For the motorsport race track, see [Mandalika International Street Circuit](/wiki/Mandalika_International_Street_Circuit "Mandalika International Street Circuit").

Not to be confused with [Sikkim](/wiki/Sikkim "Sikkim").

Lombok

| Native name: ᬕᬸᬫᬶᬲᬲᬓ᭄ (*Gumi Sasak*)  Nickname: *Pulau Seribu Masjid*  "Island of a Thousand Mosques" | |
| --- | --- |
| **From top, left to right:** Tanjung Aan beach, [Sasak](/wiki/Sasak_people "Sasak people") wedding, camping over the top of [Rinjani](/wiki/Mount_Rinjani "Mount Rinjani"), [Senggigi](/wiki/Senggigi "Senggigi") beach, and Senaru waterfall | |
| Topography of Lombok | |
| Lombok  Location of Lombok in [Indonesia](/wiki/Indonesia "Indonesia") | |
| Geography | |
| Location | [Southeast Asia](/wiki/Southeast_Asia "Southeast Asia") |
| Coordinates | [8°33′54″S 116°21′04″E﻿ / ﻿8.565°S 116.351°E﻿ / -8.565; 116.351](https://geohack.toolforge.org/geohack.php?pagename=Lombok&params=8.565_S_116.351_E_type:isle_scale:1000000) |
| Archipelago | [Lesser Sunda Islands](/wiki/Lesser_Sunda_Islands "Lesser Sunda Islands") |
| Area | 4,566.54 km2 (1,763.15 sq mi) |
| [Area rank](/wiki/List_of_islands_by_area "List of islands by area") | 123th |
| Highest elevation | 3,727 m (12228 ft) |
| Highest point | [Rinjani](/wiki/Mount_Rinjani "Mount Rinjani") |
| Administration | |
| **[Indonesia](/wiki/Indonesia "Indonesia")** | |
| Province | [West Nusa Tenggara](/wiki/West_Nusa_Tenggara "West Nusa Tenggara") |
| Regencies | * [West Lombok](/wiki/West_Lombok_Regency "West Lombok Regency") * [Central Lombok](/wiki/Central_Lombok_Regency "Central Lombok Regency") * [East Lombok](/wiki/East_Lombok_Regency "East Lombok Regency") * [North Lombok](/wiki/North_Lombok_Regency "North Lombok Regency") |
| Largest settlement | [Mataram](/wiki/Mataram_(city) "Mataram (city)") (pop. 445,000) |
| Demographics | |
| Demonym | Lombok Islander |
| Population | 4,056,621 (mid 2024 estimate) |
| [Population rank](/wiki/List_of_islands_by_population "List of islands by population") | 30th |
| Pop. density | 888.3/km2 (2300.7/sq mi) |
| Ethnic groups | [Sasak](/wiki/Sasak_people "Sasak people"), [Balinese](/wiki/Balinese_people "Balinese people"), [Mbojo](/wiki/Bimanese_people "Bimanese people"), [Chinese-Indonesian](/wiki/Chinese_Indonesian "Chinese Indonesian"), [Sumbawa](/wiki/Sumbawa_people "Sumbawa people"), [Flores](/wiki/Flores#Culture "Flores"), [Arab](/wiki/Arab_Indonesian "Arab Indonesian"), [Javanese](/wiki/Javanese_people "Javanese people"), [Banjarese](/wiki/Banjar_people "Banjar people"), [Malay](/wiki/Malays_(ethnic_group) "Malays (ethnic group)"), [Batak](/wiki/Batak "Batak") |

**Lombok**,[[a]](#cite_note-1) is an island in [West Nusa Tenggara](/wiki/West_Nusa_Tenggara "West Nusa Tenggara") province, [Indonesia](/wiki/Indonesia "Indonesia"). It forms part of the chain of the [Lesser Sunda Islands](/wiki/Lesser_Sunda_Islands "Lesser Sunda Islands"), with the [Lombok Strait](/wiki/Lombok_Strait "Lombok Strait") separating it from [Bali](/wiki/Bali "Bali") to the west and the [Alas Strait](/wiki/Alas_Strait "Alas Strait") between it and [Sumbawa](/wiki/Sumbawa "Sumbawa") to the east. It is roughly circular, with a "tail" ([Sekotong Peninsula](/wiki/Sekotong_Peninsula "Sekotong Peninsula")) to the southwest, about 70 kilometres (43 miles) across and a total area of about 4,566.54 square kilometres (1,763.15 square miles) including smaller offshore islands. The provincial capital and largest city on the island is [Mataram](/wiki/Mataram_(city) "Mataram (city)").

Lombok is somewhat similar in size and density, and shares some cultural heritage with the neighboring island of [Bali](/wiki/Bali "Bali") to the west. However, it is administratively part of [West Nusa Tenggara](/wiki/West_Nusa_Tenggara "West Nusa Tenggara"), along with the larger but less densely populated island of [Sumbawa](/wiki/Sumbawa "Sumbawa") to the east. Lombok is surrounded by a number of smaller islands locally called [Gili](/wiki/Gili_Islands "Gili Islands").

The island was home to some 3,168,692 people as recorded in the decennial 2010 census[[1]](#cite_note-Biro_Pusat_Statistik_2011-2) and 3,758,631 in the 2020 Census;[[2]](#cite_note-Badan_Pusat_Statistik_2021-3) the official estimate as at 2024 was 4,056,621.[[3]](#cite_note-Badan_Pusat_Statistik_2025-4) *[Lomboq](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/lomboq "wikt:lomboq")* is [Sasak](/wiki/Sasak_language "Sasak language") for *straight, honest*.

Administration
--------------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=1 "Edit section: Administration")]

Lombok is under the administration of the Governor of the province of [West Nusa Tenggara](/wiki/West_Nusa_Tenggara "West Nusa Tenggara") (*Nusa Tenggara Barat*). The province is administered from the provincial capital of [Mataram](/wiki/Mataram_(city) "Mataram (city)") in West Lombok.

The island is administratively divided into four *kabupaten* (regencies) and one *kota* (city). They are as follows, with their administrative capitals, their areas, and their populations at the 2010 census[[1]](#cite_note-Biro_Pusat_Statistik_2011-2) and the 2020 census,[[2]](#cite_note-Badan_Pusat_Statistik_2021-3) together with the official estimates as at mid 2024.[[3]](#cite_note-Badan_Pusat_Statistik_2025-4)

| Kode Wilayah | Name of  City or Regency | Capital | Area  in km2 | Pop'n   2010  census | Pop'n   2020  census | Pop'n   mid 2024  estimate | [HDI](/wiki/Human_Development_Index "Human Development Index")[[4]](#cite_note-5) 2014 estimates |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 52.01 | [West Lombok Regency](/wiki/West_Lombok_Regency "West Lombok Regency")  (Lombok Barat) | [Gerung](/wiki/Gerung "Gerung") | 922.91 | 599,986 | 721,481 | 763,757 | 0.635 (Medium) |
| 52.02 | [Central Lombok Regency](/wiki/Central_Lombok_Regency "Central Lombok Regency")  (Lombok Tengah) | [Praya](/wiki/Praya,_Lombok "Praya, Lombok") | 1,168.13 | 860,209 | 1,034,859 | 1,128,716 | 0.618 (Medium) |
| 52.03 | [East Lombok Regency](/wiki/East_Lombok_Regency "East Lombok Regency")  (Lombok Timur) | [Selong](/wiki/Selong,_Lombok "Selong, Lombok") | 1,605.55 | 1,105,582 | 1,325,240 | 1,457,591 | 0.620 (Medium) |
| 52.08 | [North Lombok Regency](/wiki/North_Lombok_Regency "North Lombok Regency")  (Lombok Utara) | [Tanjung](/wiki/Tanjung,_Lombok "Tanjung, Lombok") | 809.53 | 200,072 | 247,400 | 261,557 | 0.601 (Medium) |
| 52.71 | [Mataram City](/wiki/Mataram_(city) "Mataram (city)") |  | 60.42 | 402,843 | 429,651 | 445,000 | 0.759 (High) |
|  | ***Total Lombok*** |  | *4,566.54* | *3,168,692* | *3,758,631* | *4,056,621* |  |

History
-------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=2 "Edit section: History")]

The 14th century [Majapahit](/wiki/Majapahit "Majapahit") manuscript [Nagarakretagama](/wiki/Nagarakretagama "Nagarakretagama") canto 14 mentioned "Lombok Mirah" as one of island identified under Majapahit suzerainty.[[6]](#cite_note-7) Other than the *Babad Lombok* document which records the [1257 Samalas eruption](/wiki/1257_Samalas_eruption "1257 Samalas eruption"), little is known about Lombok before the seventeenth century. Before this time it was made up of numerous competing and feuding petty states, each of which was presided over by a Sasak 'prince'. This disunity was taken advantage of by the neighbouring Balinese who took control of western Lombok in the early seventeenth century.

The [Makassarese](/wiki/Makassarese_people "Makassarese people") meanwhile invaded eastern Lombok from their colonies in neighbouring [Sumbawa](/wiki/Sumbawa "Sumbawa"). The [Dutch](/wiki/Dutch_people "Dutch people") had first visited Lombok in 1674 and the [Dutch East India Company](/wiki/Dutch_East_India_Company "Dutch East India Company") concluded its first treaty with the Sasak Princess of Lombok. The Balinese had managed to take over the whole island by 1750, but Balinese infighting resulted in the island being split into four feuding Balinese kingdoms. In 1838, the Mataram kingdom brought its rivals under control.

Relations between the [Sasak](/wiki/Sasak "Sasak") and Balinese in western Lombok were largely harmonious and intermarriage was common. In the island's east, however, relations were less cordial and the Balinese maintained control from garrisoned forts. While Sasak village government remained in place, the village head became little more than a tax collector for the Balinese. Villagers became a kind of [serf](/wiki/Serf "Serf") and Sasak aristocracy lost much of its power and land holdings.

During one of the many Sasak peasant rebellions against the Balinese, Sasak chiefs sent envoys to the Dutch in Bali and invited them to rule Lombok. In June 1894, the governor general of the Dutch East Indies, Van der Wijck, signed a treaty with Sasak rebels in eastern Lombok. He sent a large army to Lombok and the Balinese raja capitulated to Dutch demands. (see [Dutch intervention in Lombok](/wiki/Dutch_intervention_in_Lombok_and_Karangasem "Dutch intervention in Lombok and Karangasem")) The younger princes however overruled the raja and attacked and pushed back the Dutch. The Dutch counterattacked overrunning Mataram and the raja surrendered. The entire island was annexed to the [Netherlands East Indies](/wiki/Netherlands_East_Indies "Netherlands East Indies") in 1895. The Dutch ruled over Lombok's 500,000 people with a force of no more than 250 by cultivating the support of the Balinese and Sasak aristocracy. The Dutch are remembered in Lombok as liberators from Balinese hegemony.

During [World War II](/wiki/World_War_II "World War II") a Japanese invasion force comprising elements of the [2nd Southern Expeditionary Fleet](/wiki/Southern_Expeditionary_Fleet_(Imperial_Japanese_Navy)#2nd_Southern_Expeditionary_Fleet "Southern Expeditionary Fleet (Imperial Japanese Navy)") invaded and occupied the Lesser Sunda Islands, including the island of Lombok. They sailed from [Soerabaja](/wiki/Soerabaja "Soerabaja") harbour at 09:00 hrs on 8 March 1942 and proceeded towards Lombok Island. On 9 March 1942 at 17:00 hrs the fleet sailed into port of [Ampenan](/wiki/Ampenan "Ampenan") on Lombok Island. The Dutch defenders were soon defeated and the island occupied.[[7]](#cite_note-8)

Following the cessation of hostilities the Japanese forces occupying Indonesia were withdrawn and Lombok returned temporarily to Dutch control. Following the subsequent Indonesian independence from the Dutch, the Balinese and Sasak aristocracy continued to dominate Lombok. In 1958, the island was incorporated into the province of [West Nusa Tenggara](/wiki/West_Nusa_Tenggara "West Nusa Tenggara") with Mataram becoming the provincial capital. [Mass killings of communists](/wiki/Indonesian_killings_of_1965-66 "Indonesian killings of 1965-66") occurred across the island following [the abortive coup attempt](/wiki/30_September_Movement "30 September Movement") in Jakarta and Central Java. During [President Suharto](/wiki/President_Suharto "President Suharto")'s [New Order](/wiki/Orde_Baru "Orde Baru") administration (1967–1998), Lombok experienced a degree of stability and development but not to the extent of the boom and wealth in Java and Bali. Crop failures led to famine in 1966 and food shortages in 1973. The national government's *[transmigrasi](/wiki/Transmigrasi "Transmigrasi")* program moved a lot of people out of Lombok. The 1980s saw external developers and speculators instigate a nascent tourism boom although local's share of earnings was limited. Indonesia's political and economic crises of the late 1990s hit Lombok hard. In January 2000, riots broke out across Mataram with [Christians](/wiki/Christians "Christians") and ethnic Chinese the main victims, with alleged *agents provocateur* from outside Lombok. Tourism slumped, but in recent years has seen a renewed growth.

### 2018 earthquakes

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=3 "Edit section: 2018 earthquakes")]

The [July 2018 Lombok earthquake](/wiki/July_2018_Lombok_earthquake "July 2018 Lombok earthquake") killed 20 people and injured hundreds more. The earthquake caused significant damage to Lombok island and was the foreshock of a larger earthquake that followed eight days later.[[8]](#cite_note-9)[[9]](#cite_note-10) The [5 August 2018 Lombok earthquake](/wiki/5_August_2018_Lombok_earthquake "5 August 2018 Lombok earthquake") had a [moment magnitude](/wiki/Moment_magnitude "Moment magnitude") of 7.0, and it caused catastrophic damage to North Lombok and also caused damage to nearby [Bali](/wiki/Bali "Bali"). In total, it caused over 550 deaths and more than 7000 were injured.[[10]](#cite_note-11) Another Lombok earthquake occurred on [19 August 2018](/wiki/19_August_2018_Lombok_earthquake "19 August 2018 Lombok earthquake"), killing 13 people and damaging 1800 buildings.[[11]](#cite_note-12)

Initially, the Indonesian [National Board for Disaster Management](/wiki/BNPB "BNPB") refused international aid, claiming "earthquakes did not constitute a national emergency" and that locals were capable enough to respond without help.[[12]](#cite_note-13) However, the infrastructure for disaster management and relief was not adequately in place in and around Lombok; therefore, the first responders to the disaster were stretched local government agencies such as police & military personnel, domestic and foreign volunteers and business owners in the parts of Lombok that were less affected by the quakes, including the Gili islands. Small scale international fundraising initiatives were organised through social networks and the web to help source basic resources such as food & clean water,[[13]](#cite_note-14) and begin assisting with temporary and permanent shelter.[[14]](#cite_note-15) This was vital in the early stages of the disaster, before larger scale government assistance arrived.

Geography
---------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=4 "Edit section: Geography")]

The island is to the immediate east of the [Lombok Strait](/wiki/Lombok_Strait "Lombok Strait") which marks the [biogeographical](/wiki/Biogeography "Biogeography") division between the fauna of the [Indomalayan realm](/wiki/Indomalayan_realm "Indomalayan realm") and the distinctly different fauna of [Australasia](/wiki/Australasian_realm "Australasian realm"); this distinction, known as the "[Wallace Line](/wiki/Wallace_Line "Wallace Line")" (or "Wallace's Line") takes its name from [Alfred Russel Wallace](/wiki/Alfred_Russel_Wallace "Alfred Russel Wallace")[[15]](#cite_note-16) (1823–1913), who was the first person to comment on the division between the two regions, as well as on the abrupt boundary between the two biomes.[[16]](#cite_note-17) Lombok is part of the [Lesser Sundas deciduous forests](/wiki/Lesser_Sundas_deciduous_forests "Lesser Sundas deciduous forests") [ecoregion](/wiki/Ecoregion "Ecoregion").

To the east of Lombok lies the [Alas Strait](/wiki/Alas_Strait "Alas Strait"), a narrow body of water separating the island of Lombok from the nearby island of [Sumbawa](/wiki/Sumbawa "Sumbawa").

The island's topography is dominated by the centrally-located [stratovolcano](/wiki/Stratovolcano "Stratovolcano") [Mount Rinjani](/wiki/Mount_Rinjani "Mount Rinjani"), the second-highest volcano in Indonesia, which rises to 3,726 metres (12,224 ft), making Lombok the [8th-highest island](/wiki/List_of_islands_by_highest_point "List of islands by highest point"). The most recent eruption of Rinjani occurred in September 2016 at Gunung Barujari. In a 2010 eruption, ash was reported as rising 2 kilometres (1.2 miles) into the atmosphere from the Barujari cone in Rinjani's caldera lake of Segara Anak. [Lava](/wiki/Lava "Lava") flowed into the caldera lake, raising its temperature, while ash fall damaged crops on the slopes of Rinjani. The volcano and its crater lake, [Segara Anak](/wiki/Lake_Segara_Anak "Lake Segara Anak") (child of the sea), are protected by the [Gunung Rinjani National Park](/wiki/Gunung_Rinjani_National_Park "Gunung Rinjani National Park") established in 1997. Recent evidence indicates an ancient volcano, Mount Samalas, of which now only a caldera remains, was the source of the [1257 Samalas eruption](/wiki/1257_Samalas_eruption "1257 Samalas eruption"), one of the largest volcanic eruptions in recorded history, which caused worldwide changes in weather.[[17]](#cite_note-18)

The [highlands](/wiki/Highland_(geography) "Highland (geography)") of Lombok are forest-clad and mostly undeveloped. The [lowlands](/wiki/Lowland "Lowland") are highly cultivated. [Rice](/wiki/Rice "Rice"), [soybeans](/wiki/Soybean "Soybean"), [coffee](/wiki/Coffee "Coffee"), [tobacco](/wiki/Tobacco "Tobacco"), [cotton](/wiki/Cotton "Cotton"), [cinnamon](/wiki/Cinnamon "Cinnamon"), [cacao](/wiki/Cocoa_bean "Cocoa bean"), [cloves](/wiki/Clove "Clove"), [cassava](/wiki/Cassava "Cassava"), [corn](/wiki/Maize "Maize"), [coconuts](/wiki/Coconut "Coconut"), [copra](/wiki/Copra "Copra"), [bananas](/wiki/Banana "Banana") and [vanilla](/wiki/Vanilla "Vanilla") are the major crops grown in the fertile soils of the island. The southern part of the island is fertile but drier, especially toward the southern coastline.

### List of islands

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=5 "Edit section: List of islands")]

Lombok is surrounded by many islets, including:

* Northwest: colloquially the [Gili Islands](/wiki/Gili_Islands "Gili Islands") (North Lombok Regency)
  + Gili Trawangan
  + Gili Meno
  + Gili Air
* Northeast (East Lombok Regency)
  + Gili Lawang
  + Gili Sulat
  + Gili Petagan
  + Gili Bidara (Pasaran)
  + Gili Lampu[[18]](#cite_note-19)
  + Gili Puyu
  + Gili Kondo
  + East Coast of Nusa Tenggara
  + Gili Puyuh
  + Gili Sulat
* Southeast (East Lombok Regency)
  + Gili Indah
  + Gili Merengke
  + Gili Belek
  + Gili Ular
* South Coast (West Lombok Regency)
  + Gili Solet
  + Gili Sarang Burung
  + Gili Kawu
  + Gili Puyuh
* Southwest ([Sekotong Peninsula](/wiki/Sekotong_Peninsula "Sekotong Peninsula"), West Lombok Regency)
  + Gili Nanggu
  + Gili Sudak
  + Gili Tangkong
  + Gili Kedis
  + Gili Poh
  + Gili Genting
  + Gili Lontar
  + Gili Layar
  + Gili Amben
  + Gili Gede
  + Gili Anyaran
  + Gili Layar
  + Gili Asahan

Water problem
-------------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=6 "Edit section: Water problem")]

The water supply in Lombok is stressed and this places strain both upon the water supply of the provincial capital, Mataram, and upon that of the island in general. The southern and central areas are reported to be the most critically affected. West [Nusa Tenggara](/wiki/Nusa_Tenggara "Nusa Tenggara") province in general is threatened with a water crisis caused by increasing forest and water table damage and degradation, and increased human population demands. 160 thousand hectares of a total of 1960 thousand hectares are thought to have been affected. The Head of Built Environment and Security Forest Service Forest West Nusa Tenggara Andi Pramari stated in Mataram on Wednesday, May 6, 2009, that, "If this situation is not addressed it can be expected that within five years it may be difficult for people to obtain water in this part of NTB (West Nusa Tenggara). Not only that, the productivity of agriculture in value added will fall, and the residents are experiencing water deficiency in their wells". High cases of timber theft in the region of NTB are contributing to this problem.[[19]](#cite_note-20)

In September 2010 in [Central Lombok](/wiki/Central_Lombok_Regency "Central Lombok Regency"), some villagers reportedly walked for several hours to fetch a single pail of water. Nieleando, a small coastal village about 50 kilometers from the provincial capital, Mataram, has seen dry wells for years. Occasionally this problem escalates sufficiently for disputes and fighting between villagers to occur. The problems have been reported to be most pronounced in the districts of Jonggat, Janapria, Praya Timur, Praya Barat, Praya Barat Daya and Pujut. In 2010 provincial authorities declared all six districts drought areas.[[20]](#cite_note-21) Sumbawa, the other main island of the province, also experienced severe drought in 2010, making it a province-wide issue.[[21]](#cite_note-22)

Areas in southern Lombok Island were classified as [arid](/wiki/Arid "Arid") and prone to water shortages due to low rainfall and lack of water sources. In May 2011, groundbreaking began on [Pandanduri](/w/index.php?title=Pandanduri&action=edit&redlink=1 "Pandanduri (page does not exist)") dam construction, which will span about 430 hectares and cost an estimated Rp.800 billion ($92.8 million). When finished, the dam will accommodate about 25.7 million cubic meters of water and be able to irrigate 10,350 hectares of farmland. Project construction was expected to last five years.[[22]](#cite_note-23)

Demographics
------------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=7 "Edit section: Demographics")]

The island's inhabitants are 85% [Sasak](/wiki/Sasak "Sasak"), whose ancestors are thought to have migrated from Java in the first millennium BC. Other residents include an estimated 10–15% [Balinese](/wiki/Balinese_people "Balinese people"), with the small remainder being [Chinese-Peranakan](/wiki/Chinese_Indonesian "Chinese Indonesian") Indonesians, [Javanese](/wiki/Javanese_people "Javanese people"), [Sumbawa](/wiki/Sumbawa_people "Sumbawa people") and [Arab Indonesians](/wiki/Arab_Indonesian "Arab Indonesian").

The Sasak population are culturally and linguistically closely related to the Balinese, but unlike the Hindu Balinese, the majority are Muslim and the landscape is punctuated with mosques and minarets. Islamic traditions and holidays influence the Island's daily activities.

In 2008 the Island of Lombok had 866,838 households and an average of 3.635 persons per household.[[23]](#cite_note-24) The 2020 census recorded a population of 5,320,092 people[[24]](#cite_note-westnusatenggarapopulation-25) in the province of [NTB](/wiki/Nusa_Tenggara_Barat "Nusa Tenggara Barat"); the official estimate as at mid 2022 was 5,590,359 of which over 70.9% reside on Lombok, giving it a population of 3,963,842 at that date.[[25]](#cite_note-26)

Religion
--------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=8 "Edit section: Religion")]

The island's [indigenous](/wiki/Indigenous_peoples "Indigenous peoples") [Sasak](/wiki/Sasak "Sasak") people are predominantly [Muslim](/wiki/Muslim "Muslim").[[26]](#cite_note-27) However before the arrival of [Islam](/wiki/Islam "Islam") Lombok experienced a long period of [Hindu](/wiki/Hindu "Hindu") and [Buddhist](/wiki/Buddhist "Buddhist") influence that reached the island through [Java](/wiki/Java "Java"). A minority [Balinese](/wiki/Bali "Bali") Hindu culture remains in Lombok. Islam may have first been brought to Lombok by traders arriving from [Sumbawa](/wiki/Sumbawa "Sumbawa") in the 17th century who then established a following in eastern Lombok. Other accounts describe the first influences arriving in the first half of the sixteenth century. The palm leaf manuscript Babad Lombok which contains the history of Lombok describes how Sunan Prapen was sent by his father The Susuhunan Ratu of Giri on a military expedition to Lombok and Sumbawa in order to convert the population and propagate the new [religion](/wiki/Religion_in_Indonesia "Religion in Indonesia"). However, the new religion took on a highly [syncretistic](/wiki/Syncretist "Syncretist") character, frequently mixing [animist](/wiki/Animist "Animist") and Hindu-Buddhist beliefs and practices with Islam.[[27]](#cite_note-Cederroth_1996-28)

A more orthodox version of Islam increased in popularity in the early twentieth century. The Indonesian government religionization programs (acquiring of a religion) in Lombok during 1967 and 1968 led to a period of some considerable confusion in religious allegiances and practices. These religionization programs later led to the emergence of more conformity in religious practices in Lombok. The Hindu minority religion is still practised in Lombok alongside the majority Muslim religion.[[27]](#cite_note-Cederroth_1996-28)

[Hinduism](/wiki/Hinduism_in_Indonesia "Hinduism in Indonesia") is followed by ethnic Balinese and by a minority of the indigenous Sasak. All the main Hindu religious ceremonies are celebrated in Lombok and there are many villages throughout Lombok that have a Hindu majority population. According to local legends two of the oldest villages on the island, Bayan, and Sembalun, were founded by a prince of [Majapahit](/wiki/Majapahit "Majapahit").[[27]](#cite_note-Cederroth_1996-28) According to the 2010 population census declared adherents of [Hinduism](/wiki/Hinduism "Hinduism") numbered 101,000 people with the highest concentration in the [Mataram](/wiki/Mataram_(city) "Mataram (city)") Regency where they accounted for 14% of the population.[[28]](#cite_note-29) The Ditjen Bimas Hindu (DBH)/ Hindu Religious Affairs Directorate's own analysis conducted in close association with Hindu communities throughout the country found that the number of Hindus in the population is much higher than counted in the government census. The survey carried out in 2012 found the Hindu population of Lombok to be 445,933. This figure is more in line with the commonly stated view that 10–15% of the Islands population is Hindu.[[29]](#cite_note-30)

The [Nagarakertagama](/wiki/Nagarakertagama "Nagarakertagama"), the 14th-century palm leaf poem that was found on Lombok places the island as one of the vassals of the Majapahit empire. This manuscript contained detailed descriptions of the Majapahit Kingdom and also affirmed the importance of Hindu-Buddhism in the Majapahit empire by describing temple, palaces and several ceremonial observances.[[27]](#cite_note-Cederroth_1996-28)

[Christianity](/wiki/Christianity_in_Indonesia "Christianity in Indonesia") is practised by a small minority including some ethnic Chinese and immigrants from Bali and East Nusa Tenggara. There are Roman Catholic churches and parishes in Ampenan, Mataram, Praya and Tanjung. There is a catholic hospital in Mataram as well. Two Buddhist temples can be visited in and around Tanjung where about 800 Buddhists live.

The history of a small Arab community in Lombok has history dating back to early settlement by traders from Yemen. The community is still evident mainly in Ampenan, the old Port of Mataram. Due to the siting of a UNHCR refugee centre in Lombok some refugees from middle eastern countries have intermarried with Lombok people[*[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")*].

A non-orthodox Islamic group found only on Lombok are the Wektu Telu ("Three times"), who performed three obligatory daily prayers ([Salah](/wiki/Salah "Salah")) instead of five observed by majority of Muslim elsewhere.[[b]](#cite_note-33) Waktu Telu beliefs are entwined with [animism](/wiki/Animism "Animism"), and is influenced not only by Islam, but also Hinduism and [pantheistic](/wiki/Pantheistic "Pantheistic") beliefs. There are also remnants of Boda who maintain native Sasak beliefs and could be representative of an original Sasak culture, undiluted by later Islamic influences.[[27]](#cite_note-Cederroth_1996-28)

Many influences of animist belief prevail within the Sasak people, most of whom believe in the existence of spirits or *ghosts*. They regard both food and prayer as indispensable whenever they seek to communicate with spirits, including the dead and ritualistic traditional practices endure.[[32]](#cite_note-34) Traditional magic is practised to ward off evil and illness and to seek solutions to disputations and antipathy. Magic may be practised by an individual alone but normally a person experienced in such things is sought out to render a service. Normally money or gifts are made to this person and the most powerful practitioners are treated with considerable respect.[[33]](#cite_note-35)

Further information: [Merariq](/wiki/Merariq "Merariq")

Economy and politics
--------------------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=9 "Edit section: Economy and politics")]

Many of the visitors to Lombok and much of the islands goods come across the Lombok Strait by sea or air links from [Bali](/wiki/Bali "Bali"). Only 40 kilometres (25 mi) separate the two islands.[[34]](#cite_note-36) Lombok is often marketed as "an unspoiled Bali," or "Bali's sister island." With support from the central government, Lombok and Sumbawa are being developed as Indonesia's second destination for international and domestic tourism.[*[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")*] Lombok has retained a more natural, uncrowded and undeveloped environment, which attract travelers who come for its relaxed pace and the opportunity to explore the island's unspoiled natural environment.[*[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")*] The more contemporary marketing campaigns for Lombok/Sumbawa seek to differentiate from Bali and promote the island of Lombok as a standalone destination. The opening of the [Lombok International Airport](/wiki/Lombok_International_Airport "Lombok International Airport") on 1 October 2011 assisted in this endeavor.

[Nusa Tenggara Barat](/wiki/Nusa_Tenggara_Barat "Nusa Tenggara Barat") and Lombok may be considered economically depressed by [First World](/wiki/First_World "First World") standards and a large majority of the population live in poverty. Still, the island is fertile, has sufficient rainfall in most areas for agriculture, and possesses a variety of climate zones. Consequently, food in abundant quantity and variety is available inexpensively at local farmer's markets, though locals still suffer from famine due to drought and subsistence farming. A family of 4 can eat [rice](/wiki/Rice "Rice"), [vegetables](/wiki/Vegetables "Vegetables"), and [fruit](/wiki/Fruit "Fruit") for as little as US$0.50. Even though a family's income may be as small as US$1.00 per day from fishing or farming, many families are able to live a contented and productive life on a low income. However, the people of Lombok are coming under increasing pressure from rising food and fuel prices. Access to housing, education and health services remains difficult for many of the island's indigenous population although public education is free throughout the province and an attempt is made to provide elementary schools even in remote areas.

The percentage of the population living in poverty in urban areas of [Nusa Tenggara Barat](/wiki/Nusa_Tenggara_Barat "Nusa Tenggara Barat") in 2008 was 29.47% and in 2009 it was 28.84%. For those living in rural areas in 2008 it was 19.73% and in 2009 it reduced marginally to 18.40%. For combined urban and village the figures were 23.81% and in 2009 it fell slightly to 22.78%.[[35]](#cite_note-37)

In Mataram in 2008 the percentage of the population that was unmarried was 40.74%, married 52.01%, divorced 2.51% and widowed 4.75%.[[36]](#cite_note-38)

Illegal cage bird trade has been observed in the city of Mataram and during five market visits in 2018 and 2019, 10,326 birds of 108 species were observed, with 18 of these species being nationally protected and many others harvested from the wild in violation of national harvest and trade quotas. [[37]](#cite_note-39)

Tourism
-------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=10 "Edit section: Tourism")]

See also: [Mandalika, Lombok](/wiki/Mandalika,_Lombok "Mandalika, Lombok")

### Pre-1997

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=11 "Edit section: Pre-1997")]

Tourist development started in the mid-1980s when Lombok attracted attention as an 'unspoiled' alternative to Bali. Initially, low budget bungalows proliferated at places like the Gili islands and [Kuta, Lombok](/wiki/Kuta,_Lombok "Kuta, Lombok") on the South Coast. These tourist accommodations were largely owned by and operated by local business entrepreneurs. Areas in proximity to the airport, places like Senggigi, experienced rampant land speculation for prime beachfront land by big businesses from outside Lombok.

In the 1990s the national government in Jakarta began to take an active role in planning for and promoting Lombok's tourism. Private organizations like the Bali Tourism Development Corporation (BTDC) and the Lombok Tourism Development Corporation (LTDC) were formed. LTDC prepared detailed land use plans with maps and areas zoned for tourist facilities. Large hotels provide primary employment for the local population. Ancillary business, ranging from restaurants to art shops have been started by local businessmen. These businesses provide secondary employment for local residents.

### 1997 to 2007

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=12 "Edit section: 1997 to 2007")]

The [1997 Asian Financial Crisis](/wiki/1997_Asian_Financial_Crisis "1997 Asian Financial Crisis") and the [fall of Suharto](/wiki/Fall_of_Suharto "Fall of Suharto") regime in 1998 marked the beginning a decade of setbacks for tourism. Spurred by rapid devaluation of the currency and the transition to true democracy caused all of Indonesia to experience a period of domestic unrest.[[38]](#cite_note-40) Many of Indonesian Provinces struggled with elements of the population desiring autonomy or independence from the Republic of Indonesia. At the same time, fanatical Islamic [terrorism in Indonesia](/wiki/Terrorism_in_Indonesia "Terrorism in Indonesia") further aggravated domestic unrest across the archipelago.

In January 2000, radical Islamic agitators from the newly formed [Jemaah Islamiyah](/wiki/Jemaah_Islamiyah "Jemaah Islamiyah") provoked religious and ethnic violence in the [Ampenan](/wiki/Ampenan "Ampenan") area of [Mataram](/wiki/Mataram_(city) "Mataram (city)") and the southern area of [Senggigi](/wiki/Senggigi "Senggigi"). Many foreign expatriates and tourists were temporarily evacuated to Bali. Numerous foreign embassies issued Travel Warnings advising of the potential danger of traveling to Indonesia.

Subsequently, the [2002 Bali bombings](/wiki/2002_Bali_bombings "2002 Bali bombings"), the [2005 Bali bombings](/wiki/2005_Bali_bombings "2005 Bali bombings") and the [Progress of the SARS outbreak](/wiki/Progress_of_the_SARS_outbreak "Progress of the SARS outbreak") in Asia all dramatically impacted tourism activities in Lombok. Tourism was slow to return to Lombok, provoked in part by a worldwide reluctance to travel because of global tensions. Only since 2007–2008, when most developed countries lifted their Travel Warnings[[39]](#cite_note-41) has tourism recovered to pre-2000 levels.

### Present

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=13 "Edit section: Present")]

The years leading up to 2010 saw a rapid revival and promotion of tourism recovery in the tourism industry. The number of visitors far surpassed pre-2000 levels.[*[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")*]

The Indonesian government has actively promoted both Lombok and neighboring [Sumbawa](/wiki/Sumbawa "Sumbawa") as Indonesia's number two tourist destination after Bali. In 2009, then President of Indonesia, [Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono](/wiki/Susilo_Bambang_Yudhoyono "Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono"), the Ministry of Cultural and Tourism and the regional Governor made public statements supporting the development of Lombok as a tourism destination and setting a goal of 1 million visitors annually by the year 2012 for the combined destination of Lombok and Sumbawa.[[40]](#cite_note-42)[[41]](#cite_note-43) This has seen infrastructure improvements to the island including road upgrades and the construction of a much delayed new [International airport](/wiki/Lombok_International_Airport "Lombok International Airport") in the islands south.[[42]](#cite_note-44) Bali Tourism Development Corporation (BTDC) has been empowered to develop [Mandalika Resort Area](/wiki/Mandalika,_Lombok "Mandalika, Lombok") at southern part of the island, extending from Kuta along 8 kilometres (5.0 mi) of sandy beach.

Tourism is an important source of income on Lombok. The most developed tourism area of the island is on the west coast of the island and is centered about the township of [Senggigi](/wiki/Senggigi "Senggigi"). The immediate surrounds of the township contain the most developed tourism facilities. The west coast coastal tourism strip is spread along a 30 kilometres (19 miles) strip following the coastal road north from [Mataram](/wiki/Mataram_(city) "Mataram (city)") and the old airport at [Ampenan](/wiki/Ampenan "Ampenan"). The principal tourism area extends to Tanjung in the northwest at the foot of Mount Rinjani and includes the Sire and Medana Peninsulas and the highly popular [Gili Islands](/wiki/Gili_Islands "Gili Islands") lying immediately offshore. These three small islands are most commonly accessed by boat from Bangsal near Pemenang, Teluk Nare a little to the south, or from further south at Senggigi and Mangsit beach. Many hotels and resorts offer accommodations ranging from budget to luxurious. Recently direct fast boat services have been running from Bali making a direct connection to the Gili islands. Although rapidly changing in character, the Gili islands still provide both a lay-back backpacker's retreat and a high-class resort destination.

Other tourist destinations include [Mount Rinjani](/wiki/Mount_Rinjani "Mount Rinjani"), Gili Bidara, Gili Lawang, [Narmada](/wiki/Narmada,_West_Lombok "Narmada, West Lombok") [Park](/wiki/Park "Park") and [Mayura Park](/wiki/Mayura_Park "Mayura Park") and [Kuta](/wiki/Kuta_(Lombok) "Kuta (Lombok)") (distinctly different from Kuta, Bali).[[43]](#cite_note-45) Sekotong, in southwest Lombok, is popular for its numerous and diverse scuba diving locations.

The Kuta area is also famous for its largely deserted, white sand beaches. The Smalltown is rapidly developing since the opening of the International airport in Praya. Increasing amounts of surfers from around the globe come here seeking out perfect surf and the slow and rustic feel of Lombok. South Lombok surfing is considered some of the best in the world. Large polar lows push up through the [Indian Ocean](/wiki/Indian_Ocean "Indian Ocean") directing long range, high period [swell](/wiki/Swell_(ocean) "Swell (ocean)") from as far south as [Heard Island](/wiki/Heard_Island "Heard Island") from late March through to September or later. This coincided with the dry season and South-East trade winds that blow like clockwork. Lombok is famous for its diversity of breaks, which includes world-renowned *Desert Point* at Banko Banko in the southwest of the island.

The northern west coast near [Tanjung](/wiki/Tanjung,_Lombok "Tanjung, Lombok") has many new upmarket [hotel](/wiki/Hotel "Hotel") and [villa](/wiki/Villa "Villa") developments centered about the Sire and Medana peninsular nearby to the Gili islands and a new boating marina at Medana Bay. These new developments complement the already existing five-star resorts and a large golf course already established there.

### Promoting Halal tourism

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=14 "Edit section: Promoting Halal tourism")]

In 2019, Lombok received a score of 70, the highest among the assessed top 10 [halal](/wiki/Halal "Halal") tourist destinations in Indonesia in study conducted by the Tourism Ministry. The [Indonesian Government](/wiki/Indonesian_Government "Indonesian Government") was hoping to attract some of the anticipated 230 million Muslim travellers across the world in 2026, with potential spending of up to US$300 billion.[[44]](#cite_note-46)

According to the [Organisation of Islamic Cooperation](/wiki/Organisation_of_Islamic_Cooperation "Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"), halal (or Islamic) tourism components are halal hotels (no [alcohol](/wiki/Liquor "Liquor"), [gambling](/wiki/Gambling "Gambling"), etc.; [Quran](/wiki/Quran "Quran"), [prayer mats](/wiki/Prayer_mats "Prayer mats") and arrows indicating the direction of [Mecca](/wiki/Mecca "Mecca") in every room), halal transport (cleanliness; non-[alcoholic drinks](/wiki/Alcoholic_drink "Alcoholic drink"); publications coherent with Islam), [halal food](/wiki/Halal_food "Halal food") premises, halal (Islamic-themed) tour packages and halal finance (the financial resources of the hotel, restaurant, travel agency and the airlines have to fit with Islamic principles).[[45]](#cite_note-47)

Transport
---------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=15 "Edit section: Transport")]

[Lombok International Airport](/wiki/Lombok_International_Airport "Lombok International Airport") (*Bandara Internasional Lombok*) ([IATA](/wiki/IATA_airport_code "IATA airport code"): **LOP**, [ICAO](/wiki/ICAO_airport_code "ICAO airport code"): **WADL**) is south west of the small regional city of [Praya](/wiki/Praya,_Lombok "Praya, Lombok") in South central Lombok. It commenced operations on 1 October 2011. It replaced Selaparang airport near Ampenan.[[46]](#cite_note-48)[[47]](#cite_note-49) It is the only operational international airport within the province of West Nusa Tenggara (*Nusa Tenggara Barat*).

[Selaparang Airport](/wiki/Selaparang_Airport "Selaparang Airport") in Ampenan was closed for operations on the evening of 30 September 2011. It previously provided facilities for domestic services to Java, Bali, and Sumbawa and international services to [Singapore](/wiki/Singapore "Singapore") to [Kuala Lumpur](/wiki/Kuala_Lumpur "Kuala Lumpur") via [Surabaya](/wiki/Surabaya "Surabaya") and [Jakarta](/wiki/Jakarta "Jakarta"). It was the island's original airport and is situated on Jalan Adi Sucipto on the north western outskirts of Mataram. The terminals and basic airport infrastructure remain intact but it is closed to all civil airline traffic.

Lembar Harbor seaport in the southwest has shipping facilities and a ferry for road vehicles and passenger services. In 2013, the gross tonnage is 4.3 million Gross Tonnages or increase by 72 percent from 2012 data means in Lombok and West Nusa Tenggara the economy progress significantly.[[48]](#cite_note-50)

[Labuhan](/w/index.php?title=Labuhan&action=edit&redlink=1 "Labuhan (page does not exist)") Lombok ferry port on the east coast provides a ferry for road vehicles and passenger services to [Poto Tano](/w/index.php?title=Poto_Tano&action=edit&redlink=1 "Poto Tano (page does not exist)") on Sumbawa.

### Transport between Bali and Lombok

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=16 "Edit section: Transport between Bali and Lombok")]

Flights from [Ngurah Rai International Airport](/wiki/Ngurah_Rai_International_Airport "Ngurah Rai International Airport") ([IATA](/wiki/IATA_airport_code "IATA airport code"): **DPS**) to [Lombok "Zainuddin Abdul Madjid" International Airport](/wiki/Lombok_International_Airport "Lombok International Airport") ([IATA](/wiki/IATA_airport_code "IATA airport code"): **LOP**) take about 40 minutes. Lombok International Airport is located in southwest Lombok, 1.5 hours drive to Senggigi main tourist areas in the west Lombok, 2 hours drive to the jetty of Teluk Nara before you cross to Gili Islands and about 30 minutes drive to Kuta south Lombok.

Public ferries depart from Padang Bai (Southeast Bali) and Lembar (Southwest Lombok) every hour, taking a minimum of 4–5 hours to make the crossing in either direction.

Fast boat services are available from various departure points on Bali and principally serve the [Gili Islands](/wiki/Gili_Islands "Gili Islands"), with some significant onward traffic to the Lombok mainland. Arrival points on Lombok are dependent upon the operator, at either Teluk Nare/Teluk Kodek, Bangsal harbour or the township of Senggigi, all on the northwest coast. Operating standards vary widely.

Festivals
---------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=17 "Edit section: Festivals")]

A traditional event called the **Nyale Festival**, or Bau Nyale (meaning "to catch the sea worms[[49]](#cite_note-baliad-51)), is held between February and March. The event focuses on catching the spawning parts of *[Palola viridis](/wiki/Palola_viridis "Palola viridis")*, which are known as *nyale* or *wawo*.[[50]](#cite_note-52)[[49]](#cite_note-baliad-51) In local legend, nyale are believed to be the reincarnation of the beautiful Princess Mandalika, who had jumped into the sea to drown herself off Seger beach, after her father had set up a contest for potential suitors to fight one another to win her hand in marriage.[[51]](#cite_note-53)

See also
--------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=18 "Edit section: See also")]

* [Islands portal](/wiki/Portal:Islands "Portal:Islands")

* [Indonesia portal](/wiki/Portal:Indonesia "Portal:Indonesia")

Notes
-----

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=19 "Edit section: Notes")]

1. **[^](#cite_ref-1)** English: [/ˈlɒmbɒk/](/wiki/Help:IPA/English "Help:IPA/English") [*LOM-bok*](/wiki/Help:Pronunciation_respelling_key "Help:Pronunciation respelling key"); Indonesian: [[ˌlom.boʔ]](/wiki/Help:IPA/Malay "Help:IPA/Malay"); Sasak: [[ˈlɔm.bɔk̚]](/wiki/Help:IPA "Help:IPA")
2. **[^](#cite_ref-33)** The authority for the basic forms and number of the salah (daily prayer) is neither the hadiths nor the Quran, but rather the consensus of Muslims.[[30]](#cite_note-31)[[31]](#cite_note-32)

References
----------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=20 "Edit section: References")]

1. ^ [***a***](#cite_ref-Biro_Pusat_Statistik_2011_2-0) [***b***](#cite_ref-Biro_Pusat_Statistik_2011_2-1) Biro Pusat Statistik, Jakarta, 2011.
2. ^ [***a***](#cite_ref-Badan_Pusat_Statistik_2021_3-0) [***b***](#cite_ref-Badan_Pusat_Statistik_2021_3-1) Badan Pusat Statistik, Jakarta, 2021.
3. ^ [***a***](#cite_ref-Badan_Pusat_Statistik_2025_4-0) [***b***](#cite_ref-Badan_Pusat_Statistik_2025_4-1) Badan Pusat Statistik NTB, 28 February 2025, *Provinsi Nusa Tenggara Barat Dalam Angka 2025* (Katalog-BPS 1102001.52)
4. **[^](#cite_ref-5)** [Indeks-Pembangunan-Manusia-2014](http://bappenas.go.id/download.php?id=8975)
5. **[^](#cite_ref-6)** ["NMVW-collectie"](https://collectie.wereldculturen.nl/). *collectie.wereldculturen.nl*.
6. **[^](#cite_ref-7)** ["Indonesia, The Majapahit Era"](https://www.britannica.com/place/Indonesia/The-Majapahit-era). *Britannica*.
7. **[^](#cite_ref-8)** Klemen, L. (1999–2000). ["The Lesser Sunda Islands 1941-1942"](https://warfarewest.x10host.com/dutcheastindies/lesser_sunda.html). *Forgotten Campaign: The Dutch East Indies Campaign 1941-1942*.
8. **[^](#cite_ref-9)** ["Korban Jiwa Gempa Lombok Bertambah Jadi 20 Orang"](https://www.liputan6.com/news/read/3610277/korban-jiwa-gempa-lombok-bertambah-jadi-20-orang) [Lombok Earthquake Death Toll Increases To 20 People]. *Liputan6.com* (in Indonesian). 5 August 2018. Retrieved 2018-08-05.
9. **[^](#cite_ref-10)** ["Asia Pacific: Multiple Disasters Affect Millions in the Region"](https://reliefweb.int/report/lao-peoples-democratic-republic/asia-pacific-multiple-disasters-affect-millions-region). *ReliefWeb*. United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 30 July 2018. Retrieved 2 August 2018.
10. **[^](#cite_ref-11)** Lamb, Kate (6 August 2018). ["Indonesia Earthquake: At Least 91 Dead After Quake Strikes Lombok and Bali"](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/aug/05/powerful-earthquake-strikes-indonesia-killing-at-least-three). *The Guardian*. London. Retrieved 6 August 2018.
11. **[^](#cite_ref-12)** ["Quake Swarm Jolts Indonesian Islands, Killing at Least 13"](https://www.bangkokpost.com/world/1525142/quake-swarm-jolts-indonesian-islands-killing-at-least-13). *Bangkok Post*. 20 August 2018.
12. **[^](#cite_ref-13)** Bimal, Paul (22 September 2018). ["Lombok Earthquakes Reveal that Indonesia's Disaster Management Is Shaky"](https://www.eastasiaforum.org/2018/09/22/lombok-earthquakes-reveal-that-indonesias-disaster-management-is-shaky/). *East Asia Forum*. Retrieved 22 September 2018.
13. **[^](#cite_ref-14)** ["More Lifesaving Aid Needed Urgently as A Third Big Earthquake Hits Lombok"](https://www.oxfam.org/en/press-releases/more-lifesaving-aid-needed-urgently-third-big-earthquake-hits-lombok) (Press release). Oxfam International. 9 August 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2018.
14. **[^](#cite_ref-15)** ["Lombok Earthquake"](https://www.gilibookings.com/blog/lombok-earthquake). *Gilibookings.com*. 30 November 2020. Retrieved 30 November 2020.
15. **[^](#cite_ref-16)** Beccaloni, George; Smith, Charles. ["Other Things Named After Wallace"](https://web.archive.org/web/20120627165434/http://wallacefund.info/other-things-named-after-wallace). *The Alfred Russel Wallace Website*. Archived from [the original](http://wallacefund.info/other-things-named-after-wallace) on 2012-06-27. Retrieved 2021-07-28.
16. **[^](#cite_ref-17)** ["The World's Biomes"](http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/exhibits/biomes/index.php). *University of California Museum of Paleontology*. Retrieved 2010-10-06.
17. **[^](#cite_ref-18)** Watson, Traci (30 September 2013). ["Source of Massive Volcanic Eruption Found in Indonesia"](https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2013/09/30/salamas-volcano-forgotten-pompeii/2891495/). *USA Today*. Retrieved 19 October 2013.
18. **[^](#cite_ref-19)** *West Nusa Tenggara Map, Provincial Tourism and Cultural Office, West Nusa Tenggara, 2008*
19. **[^](#cite_ref-20)** ["NTB Akan Alami Krisis Air Bersih"](https://web.archive.org/web/20101122092128/http://www.ntbprov.go.id/baca.php?berita=4) [NTB to Experience Clean Water Crisis]. *NTB Online* (in Indonesian). 20 May 2009. Archived from [the original](http://missjoaquim.com/ntb-akan-alami-krisis-air-bersih/) on 2010-11-22. Retrieved 6 May 2009.
20. **[^](#cite_ref-21)** Fitri R. (8 September 2010). ["Water Everywhere, but Not a Drop to Drink"](https://web.archive.org/web/20100911093651/http://www.thejakartaglobe.com/home/water-everywhere-but-not-a-drop-to-drink/395323). *Jakarta Globe*. Archived from [the original](http://www.thejakartaglobe.com/home/water-everywhere-but-not-a-drop-to-drink/395323) on 11 September 2010. Retrieved 9 September 2010.
21. **[^](#cite_ref-22)** ["Geography of Lombok"](https://web.archive.org/web/20130728115223/http://www.lombok-indonesiabeach.com/about_us/Geography_Of_Lombok.html). *lombok-indonesiabeach.com*. Archived from [the original](http://www.lombok-indonesiabeach.com/about_us/Geography_Of_Lombok.html) on 2013-07-28. Retrieved 16 August 2012.
22. **[^](#cite_ref-23)** Panca Nugraha (26 May 2011). ["New Dam to Resolve Water Crisis"](https://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2011/05/26/new-dam-resolve-water-crisis.html). *The Jakarta Post*.
23. **[^](#cite_ref-24)** ["By Regency / Municipality in West Nusa Tenggara Year 2008"](https://web.archive.org/web/20170821125710/http://missjoaquim.com/jumlah-rumah-tangga-dan-rata-rata-anggota-rumah-tangga-menurut-kabupatenkota-di-provinsi-ntb-tahun-2008/). Badan Pusat Statistik Provinsi Nusa Tenggara Barat (Central Bureau of Statistics West Nusa Tenggara Province). December 11, 2009. Archived from [the original](http://missjoaquim.com/jumlah-rumah-tangga-dan-rata-rata-anggota-rumah-tangga-menurut-kabupatenkota-di-provinsi-ntb-tahun-2008/) on 2017-08-21. Retrieved 30 August 2010.
24. **[^](#cite_ref-westnusatenggarapopulation_25-0)** ["Lombok Island & West Nusa Tenggara Demography & Gender Ratio (Based on BPS 2014 Census)"](https://web.archive.org/web/20170819231724/http://marlionllc.com/lombok-ntb-demography-2014-census/). *marlionllc.com*. 19 August 2017. Archived from [the original](http://marlionllc.com/lombok-ntb-demography-2014-census/) on 2017-08-19. Retrieved 2017-08-19.
25. **[^](#cite_ref-26)** Badan Pusat Statistik, Jakarta, 28 February 2024, *Provinsi Nusa Tenggara Barat Dalam Angka 2024* (Katalog-BPS 1102001.52)
26. **[^](#cite_ref-27)** Pepplinkhuizen, Coenraad A. (Coen) (1991). "Religion - Vision of Duality and Balance". In David Pickell (ed.). [*East of Bali : from Lombok to Timor*](https://archive.org/details/eastofbalifromlo00ml/page/36/mode/1up?q=statistics). Photographs by Kal Muller. Lincolnwood [IL](/wiki/Illinois "Illinois"): Passport Books. p. 36. [ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_(identifier) "ISBN (identifier)") [0844299057](/wiki/Special:BookSources/0844299057 "Special:BookSources/0844299057"). Retrieved 2024-06-20.
27. ^ [***a***](#cite_ref-Cederroth_1996_28-0) [***b***](#cite_ref-Cederroth_1996_28-1) [***c***](#cite_ref-Cederroth_1996_28-2) [***d***](#cite_ref-Cederroth_1996_28-3) [***e***](#cite_ref-Cederroth_1996_28-4) Cederroth, Sven (1996). ["From Ancestor Worship to Monotheism: Politics of Religion in Lombok"](https://doi.org/10.33356%2Ftemenos.4916). *Temenos*. **32**: 7–36. [doi](/wiki/Doi_(identifier) "Doi (identifier)"):[10.33356/temenos.4916](https://doi.org/10.33356%2Ftemenos.4916).
28. **[^](#cite_ref-29)** ["Peringatan"](https://web.archive.org/web/20171203121120/http://sp2010.bps.go.id/index.php/site/tabel?tid=321&wid=0). Archived from [the original](http://sp2010.bps.go.id/index.php/site/tabel?tid=321&wid=0) on 2017-12-03. Retrieved 2013-09-19.
29. **[^](#cite_ref-30)** ["Google Translate"](https://web.archive.org/web/20210430121211/https://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=id&u=http%3A%2F%2Fbimashindu.kemenag.go.id%2F&prev=%2Fsearch%3Fq%3DDitjen%2BBimas%2BHindu%26client%3Dfirefox-a%26hs%3DJ48%26rls%3Dorg.mozilla%3Aen-GB%3Aofficial). Archived from [the original](https://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=id&u=http://bimashindu.kemenag.go.id/&prev=/search%3Fq%3DDitjen%2BBimas%2BHindu%26client%3Dfirefox-a%26hs%3DJ48%26rls%3Dorg.mozilla:en-GB:official) on 2021-04-30. Retrieved 2021-07-28.
30. **[^](#cite_ref-31)** ["Al-Mawrid"](https://web.archive.org/web/20110724232305/http://al-mawrid.org/pages/articles_english_detail.php?rid=156&cid=312). *al-mawrid.org*. Archived from [the original](http://al-mawrid.org/pages/articles_english_detail.php?rid=156&cid=312) on 24 July 2011.
31. **[^](#cite_ref-32)** ["Mishkat al-Masabih 981 - Prayer - كتاب الصلاة - Sunnah.com - Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (صلى الله عليه و سلم)"](https://sunnah.com/mishkat:981). *sunnah.com*. Retrieved 2021-04-19.
32. **[^](#cite_ref-34)** Telle, Kari G. (2000). ["Feeding the Dead; Reformulating Sasak Mortuary Practices"](https://doi.org/10.1163%2F22134379-90003829). *Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde*. **156** (4): 771–805. [doi](/wiki/Doi_(identifier) "Doi (identifier)"):[10.1163/22134379-90003829](https://doi.org/10.1163%2F22134379-90003829).
33. **[^](#cite_ref-35)** Anatun Aupia (2017-07-18). ["Health Belief Profile in Lombok Island, Indonesia"](https://stikeshamzar.ac.id/health-belief-profile-in-lombok-island-indonesia/). *stikeshamzar.ac.id*. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20200201084131/https://stikeshamzar.ac.id/health-belief-profile-in-lombok-island-indonesia/) from the original on 2020-02-01. Retrieved 2020-02-01.
34. **[^](#cite_ref-36)** Weiner, Eric (2008-09-21). ["Living in Bali's Shadow, but Maybe Not for Long"](https://travel.nytimes.com/2008/09/21/travel/21next.html?ref=travel). *[The New York Times](/wiki/The_New_York_Times "The New York Times")*. Retrieved 2010-04-04.
35. **[^](#cite_ref-37)** Source: Adapted from National Social Economic Survey (SUSENAS) (December 11, 2009). ["Poverty Line, Number and Percentage of Poor People in West Nusa Tenggara Province in March 2008 – March 2009"](https://web.archive.org/web/20170821125710/http://missjoaquim.com/jumlah-rumah-tangga-dan-rata-rata-anggota-rumah-tangga-menurut-kabupatenkota-di-provinsi-ntb-tahun-2008/). Badan Pusat Statistik Provinsi Nusa Tenggara Barat (Central Bureau of Statistics West Nusa Tenggara Province). Archived from [the original](http://missjoaquim.com/jumlah-rumah-tangga-dan-rata-rata-anggota-rumah-tangga-menurut-kabupatenkota-di-provinsi-ntb-tahun-2008/) on 2017-08-21.
36. **[^](#cite_ref-38)** Source: Adapted from National Social Economic Survey (SUSENAS) (December 11, 2009). ["Percentage of Population Aged 10 Years and Over and Marital Status 2008In West Nusa Tenggara Province in March 2008 – March 2009"](https://web.archive.org/web/20170821125710/http://missjoaquim.com/jumlah-rumah-tangga-dan-rata-rata-anggota-rumah-tangga-menurut-kabupatenkota-di-provinsi-ntb-tahun-2008/). Badan Pusat Statistik Provinsi Nusa Tenggara Barat (Central Bureau of Statistics West Nusa Tenggara Province). Archived from [the original](http://missjoaquim.com/jumlah-rumah-tangga-dan-rata-rata-anggota-rumah-tangga-menurut-kabupatenkota-di-provinsi-ntb-tahun-2008/) on 2017-08-21.
37. **[^](#cite_ref-39)** Leupen, Boyd T. C.; Shepherd, Loretta; Shepherd, Chris R; Damianou, Evros; Nijman, Vincent (2022-04-30). ["Market surveys in Mataram, Lombok, illustrate the expanse of legal and illegal Indonesian bird trade networks"](https://journal.unpak.ac.id/index.php/InJAST/article/view/5127). *Indonesian Journal of Applied Environmental Studies*. **3** (1): 42–52. [doi](/wiki/Doi_(identifier) "Doi (identifier)"):[10.33751/injast.v3i1.5127](https://doi.org/10.33751%2Finjast.v3i1.5127). [ISSN](/wiki/ISSN_(identifier) "ISSN (identifier)") [2722-0141](https://search.worldcat.org/issn/2722-0141). [S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_(identifier) "S2CID (identifier)") [248481041](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:248481041).
38. **[^](#cite_ref-40)** Napier, Catherine (13 September 2000). ["Analysis: Indonesia's Fragile Archipelago"](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/events/indonesia/special_report/270462.stm). *BBC News*. Retrieved 2010-04-04.
39. **[^](#cite_ref-41)** ["U.S. Lifts Indonesia Travel Warning"](https://www.usatoday.com/news/washington/2008-05-25-indonesia-travel_N.htm). *usatoday.com*. Associated Press. 2008-05-25. Retrieved 2010-04-04.
40. **[^](#cite_ref-42)** ["President Gives Full Support to Tourism"](https://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2009/07/07/president-gives-full-support-tourism.html). *The Jakarta Post*. 2009-07-07. Retrieved 2009-07-08.
41. **[^](#cite_ref-43)** ["Lombok, Sumbawa Eying 1 Million Tourists by 2012"](https://web.archive.org/web/20170819231346/http://missjoaquim.com/lombok-sumbawa-eying-1-million-tourists-by-2012/). *Miss Joaquim Pearls*. 2017-08-19. Archived from [the original](http://missjoaquim.com/lombok-sumbawa-eying-1-million-tourists-by-2012/) on 2017-08-19. Retrieved 2017-08-19.
42. **[^](#cite_ref-44)** Trisha Sertori (2009-06-07). ["An Invitation from Lombok"](https://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2009/07/06/an-invitation-lombok.html). *The Jakarta Post*. Retrieved 2009-07-07.
43. **[^](#cite_ref-45)** ["Lombok International Airport to Operate Soon"](https://en.antaranews.com/news/74276/lombok-international-airport-to-operate-soon). *Antara News*. 30 July 2011.
44. **[^](#cite_ref-46)** Riza Roidila Mufti (9 April 2019). ["Lombok Dubbed Indonesia's Best 'Halal' Destination"](https://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2019/04/09/lombok-dubbed-indonesias-best-halal-destination.html). *The Jakarta Post*. Retrieved 11 October 2020.
45. **[^](#cite_ref-47)** [Statistical, Economic and Social Research and Training Centre for Islamic Countries](/wiki/Statistical,_Economic_and_Social_Research_and_Training_Centre_for_Islamic_Countries "Statistical, Economic and Social Research and Training Centre for Islamic Countries") (SESRIC) (2017). ["Strategic Roadmap for Development of Islamic Tourism in OIC Countries"](https://www.oic-oci.org/docdown/?docID=1777&refID=1071).
46. **[^](#cite_ref-48)** ["Airport Development News"](https://web.archive.org/web/20091229053342/http://www.airports.org/aci/aci/file/ADN%20-%20Momberger/ACI-ADN%20Dec%202005.pdf) (PDF). Archived from [the original](http://www.airports.org/aci/aci/file/ADN%20-%20Momberger/ACI-ADN%20Dec%202005.pdf) (PDF) on 2009-12-29. Retrieved 2010-10-06 – via airports.org.. New Lombok International Airport, The Directorate General of Air Communication, and PT. (Persero) Angkasa Pura 1, Project Summary, Jakarta, 4th January 2005
47. **[^](#cite_ref-49)** ["Bandara Internasional Lombok Segera Diresmikan Presiden Pada 19 Oktober 2011"](https://web.archive.org/web/20111007174405/http://ntbprov.go.id/baca.php?berita=888) [Lombok International Airport Soon to be Inaugurated by the President on October 19, 2011]. *NTB Online* (in Indonesian). 2 October 2011. Archived from [the original](http://ntbprov.go.id/baca.php?berita=888) on 2011-10-07. Retrieved 2011-10-07.
48. **[^](#cite_ref-50)** ["Pelabuhan Lembar NTB Tambah Dermaga Baru"](http://www.republika.co.id/berita/ekonomi/makro/14/02/09/n0pnp3-pelabuhan-lembar-ntb-tambah-dermaga-baru). *republika.co.id* (in Indonesian). 9 February 2014.
49. ^ [***a***](#cite_ref-baliad_51-0) [***b***](#cite_ref-baliad_51-1) ["Bau Nyale… Lombok's Unique Festival"](https://www.baliadvertiser.biz/bau_nyale/). *Bali Advertiser*. 2009. Retrieved 11 October 2020.
50. **[^](#cite_ref-52)** Panca Nugraha (10 February 2020). ["More than Sea Worms: Bau Nyale Seeks to Charm Tourists with Legends, Festivities"](https://www.thejakartapost.com/travel/2020/02/10/more-than-sea-worms-bau-nyale-seeks-to-charm-tourists-with-legends-festivities.html). *The Jakarta Post*. Retrieved 11 October 2020.
51. **[^](#cite_ref-53)** ["The Exciting Bau Nyale Festival 2018 in the Enchanting Lombok Island"](https://www.indonesia.travel/au/en/event-festivals/the-exciting-bau-nyale-festival-2018-in-the-enchanting-lombok-island). *Indonesia Travel*. 12 September 2019. Retrieved 11 October 2020.

References
----------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=21 "Edit section: References")]

* Klemen, L. (1999–2000). ["Forgotten Campaign: The Dutch East Indies Campaign 1941-1942"](https://web.archive.org/web/20110726053035/http://www.dutcheastindies.webs.com/index.html). *Dutch East Indies 1941-1942*. Archived from [the original](https://warfare.gq/dutcheastindies/index.html) on 2011-07-26.

External links
--------------

[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Lombok&action=edit&section=22 "Edit section: External links")]

Media related to [Lombok](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Lombok "commons:Category:Lombok") at Wikimedia Commons

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for ***[Lombok](https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Lombok#Q7564 "wikivoyage:Lombok")***.

* [Official website](http://ntbprov.go.id/)
* [Tropenmuseum Collection of historic photos from Lombok](https://web.archive.org/web/20111001101358/http://collectie.tropenmuseum.nl/nBasicSearch.asp?showtype=icons&lang=en&type=simple&field1=*&operator1=is&searchfor1=lombok&sort=ccrelevance)
* [Lombok Indonesia Tourism](http://www.lombokindonesia.org)
* [Mount Rinjani Lombok National Park](https://web.archive.org/web/20121127201353/http://korindo-network.com/national-parks-in-indonesia/bali-and-nusa-tenggara-islands/gunung_rinjani_nationalpark.htm)
* [NY Times on Lombok](https://travel.nytimes.com/2008/09/21/travel/21next.html?ref=travel)
* [The Australian reports on Lombok: The New Bali](https://web.archive.org/web/20090218211403/http://www.theaustralian.news.com.au/business/story/0,28124,24800675-5018061,00.html)
* [Kabupaten Lombok Utara the Regency of North Lombok](https://web.archive.org/web/20170715185414/http://www.lombokutarakab.go.id/)
* [Kabupaten Lombok Tengah, the Regency of Central Lombok](https://web.archive.org/web/20160304202546/http://lomboktengahkab.go.id/)
* [Kabupaten Lombok Timur, the Regency of East Lombok](http://www.lomboktimurkab.go.id/)
* [Kabupaten Lombok Barat, the Regency of West Lombok](http://www.lombokbaratkab.go.id/)
* [Kota Mataram, City of Mataram](https://web.archive.org/web/20120228162659/http://mataramkota.go.id/)
* [Gili Asahan](https://www.halomitrekker.com/2024/02/02/gili-asahan/)
* [Attractions and Activities](https://www.lomboktrip.net/2016/02/attractions-and-activities-in-lombok.html)

| * [v](/wiki/Template:West_Nusa_Tenggara "Template:West Nusa Tenggara") * [t](/wiki/Template_talk:West_Nusa_Tenggara "Template talk:West Nusa Tenggara") * [e](/wiki/Special:EditPage/Template:West_Nusa_Tenggara "Special:EditPage/Template:West Nusa Tenggara")  Regencies and cities of [West Nusa Tenggara](/wiki/West_Nusa_Tenggara "West Nusa Tenggara") | | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Capital: [Mataram](/wiki/Mataram_(city) "Mataram (city)") | | |
| [Regencies](/wiki/Regency_(Indonesia) "Regency (Indonesia)") | * [Bima](/wiki/Bima_Regency "Bima Regency") * [Dompu](/wiki/Dompu_Regency "Dompu Regency") * [West Lombok](/wiki/West_Lombok_Regency "West Lombok Regency") * [Central Lombok](/wiki/Central_Lombok_Regency "Central Lombok Regency") * [East Lombok](/wiki/East_Lombok_Regency "East Lombok Regency") * [North Lombok](/wiki/North_Lombok_Regency "North Lombok Regency") * [Sumbawa](/wiki/Sumbawa_Regency "Sumbawa Regency") * [West Sumbawa](/wiki/West_Sumbawa_Regency "West Sumbawa Regency") |  |
| [Cities](/wiki/City_status_in_Indonesia "City status in Indonesia") | * [Bima](/wiki/Bima "Bima") * [Mataram](/wiki/Mataram_(city) "Mataram (city)") |
| See also: [List of regencies and cities of Indonesia](/wiki/List_of_regencies_and_cities_of_Indonesia "List of regencies and cities of Indonesia") | | |

| [Authority control databases](/wiki/Help:Authority_control "Help:Authority control") | |
| --- | --- |
| International | * [VIAF](https://viaf.org/viaf/315126258) * [WorldCat](https://id.oclc.org/worldcat/entity/E39PBJt43BkrcCX8vW9WG6JMT3) |
| National | * [Germany](https://d-nb.info/gnd/4036297-8) * [Japan](https://id.ndl.go.jp/auth/ndlna/00629499) * [Czech Republic](https://aleph.nkp.cz/F/?func=find-c&local_base=aut&ccl_term=ica=ge129865&CON_LNG=ENG) |

Retrieved from "<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lombok&oldid=1283447645>"

[Categories](/wiki/Help:Category "Help:Category"):

* [Lombok](/wiki/Category:Lombok "Category:Lombok")
* [Islands of West Nusa Tenggara](/wiki/Category:Islands_of_West_Nusa_Tenggara "Category:Islands of West Nusa Tenggara")
* [Lesser Sunda Islands](/wiki/Category:Lesser_Sunda_Islands "Category:Lesser Sunda Islands")
* [Islands of Indonesia](/wiki/Category:Islands_of_Indonesia "Category:Islands of Indonesia")
* [Populated places in Indonesia](/wiki/Category:Populated_places_in_Indonesia "Category:Populated places in Indonesia")
* [Islands of the Pacific Ocean](/wiki/Category:Islands_of_the_Pacific_Ocean "Category:Islands of the Pacific Ocean")

Hidden categories:

* [Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas](/wiki/Category:Pages_using_gadget_WikiMiniAtlas "Category:Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas")
* [Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments](/wiki/Category:Pages_with_non-numeric_formatnum_arguments "Category:Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments")
* [Pages with Indonesian IPA](/wiki/Category:Pages_with_Indonesian_IPA "Category:Pages with Indonesian IPA")
* [Pages with Sasak IPA](/wiki/Category:Pages_with_Sasak_IPA "Category:Pages with Sasak IPA")
* [CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id)](/wiki/Category:CS1_Indonesian-language_sources_(id) "Category:CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id)")
* [Articles with short description](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_short_description "Category:Articles with short description")
* [Short description is different from Wikidata](/wiki/Category:Short_description_is_different_from_Wikidata "Category:Short description is different from Wikidata")
* [Pages using Template:Script with unknown input](/wiki/Category:Pages_using_Template:Script_with_unknown_input "Category:Pages using Template:Script with unknown input")
* [Articles containing Sasak-language text](/wiki/Category:Articles_containing_Sasak-language_text "Category:Articles containing Sasak-language text")
* [Articles containing Indonesian-language text](/wiki/Category:Articles_containing_Indonesian-language_text "Category:Articles containing Indonesian-language text")
* [Coordinates on Wikidata](/wiki/Category:Coordinates_on_Wikidata "Category:Coordinates on Wikidata")
* [All articles with unsourced statements](/wiki/Category:All_articles_with_unsourced_statements "Category:All articles with unsourced statements")
* [Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_unsourced_statements_from_September_2010 "Category:Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010")
* [Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_unsourced_statements_from_December_2017 "Category:Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017")
* [Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_unsourced_statements_from_October_2020 "Category:Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020")
* [Commons category link is on Wikidata](/wiki/Category:Commons_category_link_is_on_Wikidata "Category:Commons category link is on Wikidata")
* [Official website not in Wikidata](/wiki/Category:Official_website_not_in_Wikidata "Category:Official website not in Wikidata")

* This page was last edited on 1 April 2025, at 15:43 (UTC).
* Text is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License](/wiki/Wikipedia:Text_of_the_Creative_Commons_Attribution-ShareAlike_4.0_International_License "Wikipedia:Text of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License");
  additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the [Terms of Use](https://foundation.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:MyLanguage/Policy:Terms_of_Use "foundation:Special:MyLanguage/Policy:Terms of Use") and [Privacy Policy](https://foundation.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:MyLanguage/Policy:Privacy_policy "foundation:Special:MyLanguage/Policy:Privacy policy"). Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the [Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.](https://wikimediafoundation.org/), a non-profit organization.

* [Privacy policy](https://foundation.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:MyLanguage/Policy:Privacy_policy)
* [About Wikipedia](/wiki/Wikipedia:About)
* [Disclaimers](/wiki/Wikipedia:General_disclaimer)
* [Contact Wikipedia](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Contact_us)
* [Code of Conduct](https://foundation.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:MyLanguage/Policy:Universal_Code_of_Conduct)
* [Developers](https://developer.wikimedia.org)
* [Statistics](https://stats.wikimedia.org/#/en.wikipedia.org)
* [Cookie statement](https://foundation.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:MyLanguage/Policy:Cookie_statement)
* [Mobile view](//en.m.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lombok&mobileaction=toggle_view_mobile)

Lombok

[Add topic](#)